stars talks  promoting healthy aging in albania
 stars talks  stars eu for students  whats in it for me?
 nordic iscar 2025
 16 specialists in production technology strengthens swedish industry
 excellent form of collaboration
 valuable feedback
 annakarin christiansson another key person at sicomap has supported and closely followed the doctoral students during their education.
 take part in the companies and doctoral students reflections on sicomap
 footer
 university west461 86 trollhättan46 520 22 30 00email and more contact information
 crisis and emergencypress and media work for us about the website accessibility statement
 160 masters students have now graduated from university west
 now 162 masters students have finally completed their studies at university west and are now ready to begin or continue their careers.
 at fridays graduation ceremony university west congratulated the more than 160 students who have earned their masters degree. the students come from all over the world and have studied at the university for one or more years. and now they are finally ready to spread their wings and join the working life
 of the graduating students 68 have studied at the department of engineering science and have earned their degrees in electric vehicle engineering manufacturing engineering and in robotics and automation.
 the remaining 94 newly graduated students have studied at the school of business economics and it and have now received degrees in the areas of finance international business workintegrated political studies it and management and in leadership.
 in the coming years the number of students who will graduate from university west at masters and level will increase due to the university developing new programmes and more international students being admitted to these programmes.
 17 students secure si scholarships at university west
 17 students secure si scholarship at university west
 17 international students starting their studies at university west this fall have been awarded the prestigious si scholarship for global professionals.
 this year the competition to get a si scholarship was intense with the swedish institute receiving over 8000 applications. of the 357 international students receiving a scholarship for the academic year 20242025 17 will study a masters program at university west in trollhättan sweden. reflecting that the universitys offerings are fit to educate future global leaders committed to democracy equality and sustainability.
 this shows that weve got highquality programs spanning a wide range of fields including social sciences informatics ai and engineering says tomas bengtsson director international affairs at university west.
 recipients are selected based on their academic achievements professional and leadership experiences and their potential to contribute to sustainable development. when arriving to trollhättan this fall this years scholarship recipients bring much experience and many cultural perspectives to the university.
 university west extends a big congratulations to this years scholarship recipients.
 were looking forward to welcoming everyone to sweden and trollhättan at the end of august tomas bengtsson concludes.
 calendar_month
 a week on democracy around the world  for students staff as well as the citizens. it is arranged by hv center for sustainability student union and kronan kulturhus within the framework of local democracy week of the council of europe. october 15th the flagship ev...
 about us
 24 competence clusters
 working as a teacher in an increasingly digitised teaching practice requires high demands and expectations across more fields than what is traditionally associated with teaching practice.
 300 international students
 programmes and courses designed with industry in mind attracts students from all over the world to trollhättan sweden.
 with the start of the semester approximately 300 new international students start their studies at university west. the netherlands india and china are just some of the more than 40 countries represented by our new students. they come to sweden both to study programmes and to study as exchange students.
 we work strategically to create a range of programmes that are attractive to international students says tomas bengtsson director of international affairs at university west.
 tomas bengtsson explains that listening to industry and the labor market the university can develop programmes that meet the needs of society.
 the master in sustainable development is one of the most popular programmes among this years international applicants. coupled with the master in ai and automation.
 kudakwashe from zimbabwe is one of the many students that has arrived to start their studies in trollhättan.
 being in sweden feels fantastic he says. its a wow feeling and im really happy to be here.
 sujata has come all the way from nepal to study in trollhättan. she is excited to be here and says she is very much looking forward to learning and experiencing new things.
 from the left kudakwashe from zimbabwe and sujata from nepal.
 many of the students arrived last week to participate in the introduction days organized by the international office at the university. before the start of the semester the international students get an introduction to what its like to study in sweden and at högskolan väst as well as what its like to live here. its also an opportunity for them to get to know each other and the campus before the studies start.
 as part of the introduction the students were given tours of the campus and in trollhättan presentations from the universitys various functions the police and trollhättan city and went on a trip to ikea.
 not everyone has arrived yet
 many of the students are still not here in trollhättan.
 unfortunately it is a long process for the students to get a residence permit says tomas bengtsson. therefore they must start their studies digitally as they wait to receive their permit.
 luckily university west has invested heavily in distance learning. this means that it is still possible for the students to start their studies from their home countries while waiting for a residence permit.
 3danimation och visualisering heltid campus sg3dv
 extra information
 filmens historia
 information om utbytesstudier
 exchange studies possible during 5th semester of studies.
 this page is under construction. more information will be published during the spring.
 information about project 3dprint.
 production technology
 participants university west
 45 years of successful innovation a longitudinal study of manufacturing smes competency orchestration for sustained innovation
 project leader
 a critical turn in higher education
 a critical turn in higher education  challenging the curriculum on gender and colonialitypostcoloniality critgenp ii  year 20192020
 background to the project
 three institutions in south africa and two in sweden take part in the project which involves the following colleagues
 dr emma barnett sol plaatje university kimberley.lecturer emma groenewald sol plaatje universitydr tony mipsi sol plaatje universitydr kevin teise sol plaatje universitydr pumla cutalele university of western capedr nosisi dlamini university of western capedr karen koopman university of western capedr oscar koopman university of western capeprofessor mathaba kau university of nelson mandela
 assoc. prof. signild risenfors university west trollhättan.assoc. professor karin flensner trollhättan.dr getahun abraham university of borås.
 project coordinators prof. beverley thaver university of western cape south africa and prof. kerstin von brömssen university west sweden.
 a new record number of international students
 cirka 300 new international students will start their studies at university west this autumn. new programs and programmes adapted to the needs of industry attract.
 yesterday around 300 new international students started at university west. this is the largest number of international students at the university  ever.
 we have made an effort to reach out internationally and try to attract an international students and the results make me very happy says tomas bengtsson director international affairs at högskolan väst.
 the biggest reasons for the successful recruitment this year are that the university have programmes catering to the need of industry explains tomas bengtsson. by having programme directors in close contact with companies university west can develop programmes better meet their needs.
 master in ai and automation is one of the most popular programmes this year as well as master in sustainable development.
 students from all over the world
 china pakistan and germany are some of the 50 or so countries students have traveled from to study here in trollhättan. they come both to study whole programmes and to do an exchange semester.
 one of those who has arrived to university west to study is dutch suze jansen. she is an exchange student and will study courses at the university west school of business economics and it.
 i feel excited and a little bit nervous says suze.
 most of all she is excited about learning more about the swedish teaching style.
 even though sweden and the netherlands are quite similar we have different perspectives on things. it will be interesting to learn more about the swedish perspective and way of thinking.
 another one of the new students is tigy varughese. he has come to trollhättan all the way from india to study the masters programme in ai and automation.
 i am very much looking forward to learning more about sweden and the swedish culture he says.
 many of the students have not yet arrived in trollhättan. this year the wait for a residence permit from the swedish migration agency is unusually long which means that many students have to study remotely while waiting.
 luckily we have good support for distance studies. we invested a lot in this technology during the pandemic says tomas bengtsson.
 a worldunique phd
 today is a historic day at university west. for the first time a dissertation was held on the subject of work integrated learning and anders sandblad now holds the first phd in work integrated learning at university west in sweden and in the world.
 anders sandblad is the first in the world to have a phd in workintegrated learning ail. here with bo göranzon senior professor in ail ulrika lundh snis professor in informatics and lars svensson professor in informatics.
 its a very special day this has been a strategic longterm work so of course i am  excited and proud today says vicechancellor martin hellström.
 the university has as the only university in sweden the governments assignment to develop work integrated learning wil and it is also the universitys overall profile. since 1 january 2020 it has also been possible to attend a doctoral program in work integrated learning at university west when wil was established as a postgraduate subject which does not exist anywhere else in the world.
 i think it is brave of us to put a new academic subject at that level. it is a great teamwork behind where we have shown courage together and seeing anders sandblad today as the first phd in wil is extremely gratifying says martin hellström.
 what a milestone for our university many of us at the university are passionate about wil but as deputy vicechancellor with this special responsibility it obviously feels a little extra today. personally i am also particularly happy as i have been anders supervisor throughout his dissertation. he really contributes to the development of the subject wil says ulrika lundh snis also professor of informatics with a focus on wil.
 about the dissertationanders sandblads dissertation yrkeskunnande maskiner människor is about professional skills and what happens when work tasks are transferred to technology. the purpose is to contribute to the understanding of professional knowledge its role and development in an increasingly digitalized working life. the interest is directed towards the experiencebased knowledge. anders sandblad was initially enrolled as a doctoral student in informatics with a focus on work integrated learning and changed to the subject wil when the opportunity arose. hence the short postgraduate time in the subject ail on paper.
 your teaching
 abc workshop for course design
 do you and your teaching team need support in planning and designing your course and its content? then this is the workshop for you
 the purpose of the workshop is for your teaching team to replan or plan a completely new course together to create variation throughout the course based on the six learning activities acquisition inquiry production collaboration discussion and practice. the workshop is handson and takes place on campus and we use a sheet a socalled storyboard and notes with the different learning activities. the course evolves on the sheet as the workshop progresses and the goal is to leave the workshop with a clear plan for the course and its content that the teachers keep and use for further detailed planning of the course. the workshop is suitable regardless of level and can be applied both to completely new courses or older courses that need to be redone or reviewed.
 content of the workshop
 introduction to the workshop
 the teaching team discusses the course and decides which learning activities should be included.
 the teaching team specifies what should be included based on the learning activity for example the activity discussion might be a session in an alc room or the activity learning might be listening to a podcast.
 the teaching team then marks the activities which are examinations both formative and summative.
 the abc activity based curriculum design workshop was developed by university college london ucl and is widely used both nationally and internationally. the workshop was developed as a way to maximize teachers time and still redesign courses when there is a need for example to include more digital elements in teaching or to rework the course based on studentcentered learning. the workshop is based on diana laurillards book teaching as a design science 2012 which connects traditional teaching theories with our contemporary and digital way of working. in this video laurillard explains the six learning theories .
 if you and your teaching team are interested in this workshop email akademus@hv.se and we will find a time together
 introduktion till workshopen
 abdulghafour mohammad
 phd associate professor in computer science
 staff member at division of informatics.
 teachingsupervision
 i teach in the program system development it and society and in the international masters program it and management. i also supervise bachelors and masters theses.
 it security privacy internet security access control information systems
 akademus is the university west hub for teachers continuous pedagogical development. we form a platform for a variety of resources and services that all strive to support and inspire you as a teacher in your pedagogical development and stimulate engaging and qualitative teaching. we thereby create conditions for our students and their successful studies.
 the akademus organization consists of pedagogical developers language supervisors and operational managers for higher education pedagogy from our various departments as well as ict educators language supervisors and media technicians who are all employed in the unit of study and academic support library and educational development. we work together with the academy on various assignments and administration. in addition to this there are a number of teachers who based on their subject expertise are also involved in the teaching within the framework of our university education course offering.
 we arrange various competencedeveloping activities such as workshops theme days and lunch seminars that are aimed at individual teaching teams as well as departments and the entire university.
 based on our monitoring of the educational environment participation in various networks and development work of our educational systems we create news tips and tricks for you who teach. we publish this on our website and send out regular newsletters.
 we offer individual support through bookable tutoring and dropin.
 through our university education course offering we offer qualificationgiving and competencedeveloping courses for the universitys teachers and pedagogically responsible.
 with the development of teaching in focus we run various pedagogical development projects within our learning environments.
 we are the system owner of the universitys various educational systems such as canvas zoom padlet hvplay etc. and are thus responsible for producing support material for both teachers and students
 management and quality assurance
 because akademus is part of sbip and the department psu the daily work is led by the head of the department and overall by the head of the unit for the operation which also includes study guidance the library the language resource center and targeted pedagogical support. added to this is the ict council which forms the steering group for the educational systems we manage as well as the program council for higher education pedagogy which is responsible for quality assurance of the higher education pedagogy course offering
 informations coordinator
 about primus
 university west is one of only a few educational institutions in sweden to receive longterm multimillion kronor support over ten years from the knowledge foundation to build a strategically complete academic environment  a socalled kk environment.
 find out more about the knowledge foundation
 vision aims and objectives
 aims and objectives
 facilitating the shift towards more sustainable streamlined and improved manufacturing processes that allow for innovative concepts for new and existing products.
 increased flexibility and greater integration of manufacturing processes into product and production development supported by digitalisation and automation.
 primuss operational management is responsible for gathering information preparing cases and presenting them to the steering group. the operational management team includes the head of programme the quality coordinator the head of the grants and innovation office and administrative support.
 lennart malmsköld programme manager annamaria blomgren quality coordinatorsarah nilsson administratorpeter olofsson head of the grants and innovation office
 area managers
 industrial workintegrated learning lars walterproduction systems fredrik sikströmproduction processes mohit gupta
 head of department of engineering science
 head of department of economics and it
 head of department for studies of the individual and society
 head of department of health sciences
 managers of primuss three core areas
 two student representatives
 strategic reference group
 primuss strategic reference group provides input for external analysis and strategic longterm development. the group meets twice a year.
 the strategic reference group includes the programme manager representatives from industry and the public sector and the vicechancellor of university west.
 here you will find more information about stars eu and which partners are part of the alliance.
 what is stars eu?
 the european commission announced on 3 june 2023 that the application from the stars eu alliance to form a european university has been granted. as of november 2023 stars eu is an official european university.
 do you want to know more about the european university initiative? read more here
 stars eu began as an alliance between a number of european higher education institutions. a partnership agreement was signed in 2021 that ensures cooperation and joint development work for ten years. the alliance applied to become a european university and the application was approved by the european commission in june 2023.
 the european university project runs for four years while the agreement between the partner universities extends over ten years.
 the objectives of the alliance
 the stars eu general objective is to build an alliance of truly engaged universities and together become a futureoriented european university that will aim to achieve several goals. the partner universities are linked in their desire to have a continued positive impact on the regional and local communities where they are situated while at the same time building a strong transnational collaboration.
 together we want to
 create a new generation of futureoriented students
 use the synergies of interregional collaboration
 impact positively and substantially on sustainable regional and european development
 besides university west there are eight other partners in the alliance
 hanze university of applied sciences the netherlandspolytechnic institute of braganca portugalhochschule bremen germanyuniversidad de la laguna spain silesian university in opava czechiacracow university of technology polanduniversité de franchecomté francealeksandër moisiu university albania
 stars eu focuses on regional development and cooperation with regional actors for the exchange of knowledge expertise and experience.
 university wests associated national cooperation partners within stars eu are
 support group network sgn
 eit manufacturing north ab
 2nd summer school on suspension and solution thermal spraying
 the summer school will include lectures from experts covering all major aspects of liquid feedstock thermal spraying ranging from fundamentals and process diagnostics to characterisation and applications. a demonstration of the versatile liquid feedstock plasma spraying equipment available at university west will also be included.
 topics
 fundamentals of coating formation  sps and spps
 modelling of coating formation  spsspps
 feedstock preparation economy and safety
 advanced tbcs and ebcs
 wear superhydrophobic other nontbcebc
 sps coatings by advanced cascaded plasma spray technology
 new thermal spray approaches employing liquid feedstock
 simone bursich lincotek surface solutions italy
 thomas coyle university of toronto canada
 nicholas curry northwest mettech corp. canada
 tanvir hussain university of nottingham uk
 christian moreau concordia university canada
 more information
 2nd summer school
 suspension and solution thermal spraying
 the host university west
 more information about the venue
 registration and travel
 more information about travel staying and registration
 child and youth studies
 about teachers relationships with parents whose children are regarded to have problems
 the overall purpose has primarily been to make visible both the good examples as well as the difficult situations in teachers relationships with children defined as having problems as well as with their parents.
 the empirical material consist of ten qualitative interviews with female teachers teaching in 13 grade. the theoretical point of departure is a relational approach and a perspective of power. relational work relational competence and relational practices are understood as being entangled with practices of power.
 the analysis shows that the informants emphasize the role of the parents in supporting their children and that they see it being of vital importance to create a trusting relationship with the parents. to create and sustain this relationship the informants use a multitude of relational practices such as giving positive feed back making the child responsible listen show empathy be personal as well as setting boundaries. the ideal for cooperation is a partnership in which the teacher and parents work together as a team however with the teacher defining the problem and leading the work. the mail obstacle to cooperation is defined by the informants is the lack of insight or understanding of the parents them not willing to  acknowledge of the problems of their child.
 about university west
 university west in trollhättan is a modern university which offers education collaborating with worklife in an attractive and modern study environment. we focus on the student and learning.
 work integrated learning as perspective and method permeates the work at the university and is also our profile.
 attractive and modern study environment
 there are about 13 500 students at university west and about 675 employees. our campus is centrally located in trollhättan and is built with the students needs in focus. the open surfaces make it simple for students teachers and worklife to coexist.
 education collaborating with worklife
 the university offers study programmes second cycle programmes and a variety of courses in computing and it economy and leadership health and care teaching and languages media the individual and society as well as technology.
 we have programmes in which we collaborate and cooperate closely with worklife businesses and society. through our profile  work integrated learning wil  students at the university gain work experience already while studying. university west has been commissioned by the government to develop pedagogics connected to wil. one example of wil is the so called coop in which studies are sandwiched with periods of paid work.
 our work with quality
 read more
 university vision and strategies
 area of strength work integrated learning
 lina  learning  in  and  for  the  new  working  life
 lina takes ail to the next level
 wil as an educational design digitalised education  competences within welfare it healthcare and learning industrial wil
 we celebrated science and knowledge during november 911 we offered open lectures with ten new professors and our two new honorary doctors. we ended the week with the academic ceremony on friday. the ceremony was broadcasted on youtube.
 registration is closed. the ceremony was broadcasted online. link to youtube.program
 at 14.30 drop in  premingling before the ceremony starts outside the albertsalenat 15.15 gathering for procession no guests outside albertsalenat 15.30 the ceremony starts in albertsalenat approx 17151900 afterparty with light mingling food outside the albertsalen.
 dress codefestive attire. for us this means that you dress up in what you think is nice and what is festive. we have no specific dress codes beyond this.
 processionreview of the procession for those participating in the ceremony is done during the dress rehersal.even previous years already awarded doctors docents honorary doctors and professors at the university west or external institutions of higher education are welcome to participate in the procession.these people will not have any dress rehearsal during the day but will gather at 15.15 outside albertsalen.other guests are not included in the procession.
 doctors hat and doctors ringdoctors who are to be promoted during the ceremony must hold their hat in their hand and not wear their doctoral ring until after the promotion has been made. after this the doctor may wear the doctors hat and wear the doctors ring.for further information contact event@hv.semaster of ceremonies rebecka haak can be reached on 0704738132
 our new professors docents and doctors
 about acacemic ceremony
 what is an academic ceremony?
 dictionary for the academic ceremony
 here you will find explanations of the terms
 find your way to university west
 support and service
 study resources
 academic study coaching
 do you need help with time management and how to structure your studies? do you find it difficult to keep yourself motivated? are you new at the university and feel a bit confused about what is expected of you?  in that case you can contact our academic study coach.
 all students both new and more experienced are welcome to contact our academic study coach. you can get help with planning and structuring your studies tips and guidance about good study techniques and tools for time management or even support on navigating on canvas. no question is too small or big and the coaching is always based on your needs.
 you can book an individual consultation as well as a group consultation.
 book a consultation with the academic study coach
 how the consultation works
 before the meeting
 if you have booked a meeting on campus you go and wait outside room i240 or i241. it says ishavet outside the door of the corridor.
 if you have chosen a digital meeting you will find the link in your booking confirmation.
 during the meeting
 the meeting will last about 45 minutes. we start by talking about your previous study results how you study today and your longterm goals. after that the coaching will differ depending on your needs. together we discuss what already works and what can be improved. for example it can be about
 how to create good habits
 how to set appropriate long and shortterm goals
 how to read effectively
 how to stay motivated
 after the meeting
 you will now have time to work with the techniques andor skills you need to improve. we often book a new meeting to discuss the results.
 drop in  academic study coaching
 during the spring of 2024 a total of 9 drop in occasions will be offered. we meet on mondays between 15001700 in akademus which is located on the second floor of the library.
 no preregistration is required. just show up welcome
 note drop in  academic study coaching cancelled may 27.
 datesmarch 11 18 25april 15 22 29may 13 20 27
 develop your study strategies
 the swedish university of agricultural sciences slu has a great website about study strategies including motivation time management memory techniques etc. there is also a long list of apps and literature on the same topics. it is well worth a visit
 on our canvas page studieteknik study techniques you can find films in english made by björn liljeqvist where he goes through how to improve your study techniques.
 if you would like to get access to these films please register for a subscription by clicking the heading above. to subscribe you must be a student at university west.
 education
 academic writing parttime campus vsk600
 academic writing 3 hp
 facts
 second cycle
 degree of bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering industrial engineering materials science and engineering or equivalent. the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of 15 credits of mathematics including basic knowledge of analysis linear algebra and statistics. in addition verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english b english 6 in the swedish high school or equivalent.
 pace of study
 type of instruction
 on campus
 teaching hours
 entry requirements selection admission study counselling and other questions
 closed for application
 about the website
 access problem in proceedosolved
 login access problems in visma proceedo.we are working on solving it.
 access to a course in canvas
 information for you who need access to an unfinished course in canvas.
 access to an unfinished course in canvas
 if you need to
 submit an assignment
 apply for examination
 have access to the current course material
 you need access to the learning platform canvas only.
 touch_app
 examination
 here you will find information about exams at university west
 here you can see a list of which courses that are given for the last time
 accessibility at university west
 an inclusive and accessible university is a prerequisite for university west to be able to conduct its activities on equal terms. we work for increased participation for people with different types of disabilities who study work and  or visit us.
 the universitys work with accessibility is based on our core values and the universitys core values which state that the activities at university west are based on and defend the principle of the equal value of all people where democracy and diversity contribute to social welfare justice and sustainable societal development.
 the work with accessibility is an important part of living in accordance with our values and creating a socially sustainable university. therefore our accessibility work is an important part of the work with sustainable development and agenda 2030.
 furthermore the work on accessibility is based on current legislation including the discrimination act sfs 2008567 the work environment act and its regulations 19771160 the ordinance for state authorities to implement disability policy and others sfs 2001526 and the disability policy prop. 1999200079.
 what is meant by accessibility and participation?
 accessibility is about how society is designed. an accessible society is designed so that as many people as possible can use and take part in it. its about being able to take part in the physical environment and be able to get around the community. it also means accessing information and communication and being able to use products and services. source swedish agency for participation questions about participation and accessibility.
 what is meant by participation?participation is about a person being able to actively participate in and be part of society. this means being able to choose independently as much as possible make your own decisions and influence your own life.
 accessibility action plan
 the university works systematically with accessibility based on action plans and a coordinated work between different functions responsible for the work. there is a working group for coordination and universitywide development work with representatives from student support hr service centers campus and premises managers the communications department and ict and media support.
 each work unit i.e. departments administration and library is responsible for the local accessibility work and adaptations for students and employees.
 every year university west participates in a major evaluation made by the swedish agency for participation. the evaluation encapsulates the universitys strengths and development areas and focuses on the following areas
 accessible information and communication
 as a result of the evaluation the working group has developed an action plan that identifies needs and priorities in the work. examples of actions and priorities
 web accessibility
 audio and video productions
 meetings seminars and conferences
 more information about universitys work with accessibility link to swedish page
 coordinator for disability study support
 accessibility statement
 accessibility statement canvas
 accessibility statement for canvas
 the accessibility statement concerns the learning platform canvas and the canvas student app. here we describe how högskolan väst university west complies with the law on accessibility to digital public services any known accessibility issues and how you can report deficiencies to us so that we can address them.
 it is the american company instructure that develops canvas on the web and the canvas app. the version of canvas we have tested is version 6.21.0 released on march 20 2023. canvas is managed by the division of educational support and development at högskolan väst university west. we aim for as many people as possible to be able to use canvas on the web and the canvas app hereinafter referred to as canvas and we continuously work by informing teaching staff on how to make their courses more accessible in canvas.
 accessibility in canvas
 canvas is a commercial product designed and developed in accordance with the internationally recognized standard web content accessibility guidelines wcag 2.1. regular system testing is conducted by the provider instructure. on this page you can read more about instructures efforts to improve accessibility in canvas. our goal is to achieve at least a basic level of accessibility according to the criteria in wcag 2.1 at level aa.
 we are aware that canvas does not yet meet all accessibility criteria due to the deficiencies described below and is therefore partially compliant with the requirements of the law 20181937 on accessibility to digital public services known as the dos act. the agency for digital government digg has developed 142 guidelines for websites in public services based on the wcag standard. it is these guidelines that we have compared canvas against.
 nonaccessible content  known deficiencies
 documents some uploaded word files pdf files and other file types are not accessible according to guideline number 88.
 video there are videos in the learning platform that lack captions or do not meet the recommendations for captions according to guideline number 117 or provide alternative options according to guideline number 116. there are videos in the learning platform that lack audio descriptions in accordance with guideline number 120.
 images diagrams and animations some contentcarrying images and diagrams in the learning platform lack text alternatives or are not sufficiently descriptive according to guideline number 115.
 links there are links in the platform that are not clearly described and accessible according to guideline number 5.
 navigation there are deficiencies in the design and structure of course navigation according to guideline number 29.
 how we tested canvas
 we have manually reviewed a selection of courses in the learning platform and performed a selfassessment as well as used the platforms own accessibility checker. we have also studied the suppliers documentation on the accessibility of the platforms technology and interface.
 what to do if you cant access parts of canvas?
 if you need access to content on canvas that is not accessible to you and is exempt from the scope of the law you can contact us by emailing servicecenter@hv.se or calling 052022 30 00.
 reporting accessibility problems with canvas
 we strive to continuously improve the accessibility of canvas and address known deficiencies. if you encounter issues that are not described on this page or if you believe that we do not meet the requirements of the law please email servicecenter@hv.se to let us know about the problem.
 the agency for digital government digg is responsible for supervision under the law on accessibility to digital public services. if you are not satisfied with how we handle your notification of accessibility issues or your request for accessible content you can report it to the swedish agency for digital government.
 accessibility statement hv play
 accessibility statement for hv play
 the accessibility statement concerns the video portal of the university west hv play. here we describe how högskolan väst university west complies with the law on accessibility to digital public services any known accessibility issues and how you can report deficiencies to us so that we can address them.
 hv play is managed by the division of educational support and development at the university west. we want as many people as possible to be able to use it. we continuously work to ensure that the hv play website meets the legal requirements.
 accessibility in hv play
 the hv play website hvplay.hv.se is a product based on the kaltura mediaspace video portal. the product is designed and developed in accordance with accessibility recommendations and is largely compliant with the international standard web content accessibility guidelines wcag version 2.1 level aa. however we are aware that we currently do not meet all the requirements in accordance with the law 20181937 on accessibility to digital public services. the website is partially compliant with the law on accessibility to digital public services due to the deficiencies described below.
 on this page you can read more about the system providers accessibility information.
 content that is not accessible  known deficiencies
 the content described below is not fully accessible in one way or another.
 some usergenerated videos on the website published after september 23 2020 lack captions or do not meet the recommendations for accessible captions in accordance with wcag 1.2.2 a.
 some usergenerated videos on the website lack audio descriptions and are not accessible in accordance with wcag 1.2.5 aa.
 how we tested the website
 we have conducted a selfassessment of the website. we have also reviewed the system providers documentation on the accessibility of the platforms technology and interface.
 what can you do if you cannot use hv play?
 if you need content from hv play that is not accessible to you but is exempt from the scope of the law as described below you can contact us by emailing servicecenter@hv.se or calling 052022 30 00.
 we strive to continuously improve the accessibility of hv play and address known issues. if you encounter problems that are not described on this page or if you believe that we do not meet the requirements of the law please email servicecenter@hv.se to let us know about the problem.
 agency for digital government digg is responsible for the supervision of the law on accessibility to digital public services. if you are not satisfied with how we handle your notification of accessibility issues or your request for accessible content you can report it to the swedish agency for digital government.
 university west is behind this website. we want as many people as possible to be able to use the website.
 the report describes how  complies with the law on accessibility to digital public service. it also describes known accessibility issues and how you can report deficiencies to us so that we can remedy them. we work continuously to ensure that the website meets the legal requirements.
 how accessible is the website?
 we are aware that at present we have not succeeded in meeting all the requirements for accessibility to digital public service. we try to solve the problems and make sure you get the digital service you are entitled to.
 ongoing testing and maintenance
 the website is tested against wcag 2.1 with the help of the web analysis tool siteimprove so that our editors and system developers can catch accessibility problems when incorrect pages are published.
 what can you do if you can not use parts of the site?
 if you need content from hv.se that is not available to you but which is exempt from the scope of the law as described below you can report the shortcomings so that we know that the problem exists.
 you can contact us as follows
 form report deficiencies in availability
 the response time is about 3 days.
 report deficiencies in website accessibility
 we are constantly striving to improve the accessibility of the website. if you discover problems that are not described on this page or if you believe that we do not meet the requirements of the law let us know so that we know that the problem exists.
 the agency for digital government digg is responsible for supervising the act on accessibility to digital public services. if you are not satisfied with how we handle your comments you can contact the agency for digital government digg and report it.
 technical information about the accessibility of the website
 this website is partially compliant with the digital public service accessibility act due to the shortcomings described below. this website is highly compliant with level aa of the standard web content accessibility guidelines version 2.1 wcag
 content that is not accessible
 we are currently aware that we have not been able to meet all the criteria of wcag on the following sections of the website
 we have some systems that automatically generate pdf files syllabys and training plans that are not fully accessible. as systems are upgraded and replaced this will be secured.
 our introductory films for new students are currently not visually interpreted.
 with regard to pedagogically filmed material we have developed guidelines and decisions to adapt our material. we have signed an agreement with reach for kaltura hvplay which we use for our educational material.
 navigation and structure
 there is no sitemap to navigate the site
 there are some systems acquired for example the vacancy service for the website that do not follow the accessibility principles.
 some pages may fail to present the content in a meaningful order to everyone. testing of the reading order with speech synthesis equipment via our team funka support measures for students with disabilities.
 some links are not clear and are used for several different destinations.
 some pages lack text on buttons that do not match machinereadable labels.
 today increasing the spacing between the lines of a web page does not work.
 unreasonably burdensome adjustment
 university west invokes exceptions for unreasonably burdensome adaptation in accordance with section 12 of the act on accessibility to digital public services for the content below.
 many of our systems create documents that are not fully accessible. it will take a lot of work to fix all the documents and we will not have time to do everything before 23 september 2020.
 automatically generated pdf files course plans and study plans from the education database course info. developing a function that creates accessible pdf files would require extensive resources from university west. a new version of course info is also under development. anyone in need of adapted course or training plans can contact servicecenter@hv.se for help.
 how have we tested the website?
 we have done a selfassessment internal testing and expertise of hv.se and with the help of the web analysis tool siteimprove.
 our ambition is to have remedied all known technical accessibility problems and to continuously work with editorially controlled accessibility.
 accessible buildings and environments
 information about the accessiblity to the university buildings and environments both on campus and in the centre for production technology.
 what is meant by a buildings accessibility?
 accessible buildings are those to which among others people with disabilities can enter and in which they can move around easily. they are also buildings that can be evacuated in an emergency. accessibility means that there are signs and symbols that everyone understands as well as contrast markings and hearing aid technology.
 opening hours and contact
 information about opening hours the main entrance access to buildings and so on can be found under contact and visit.
 adaptation of buildings
 if a building needs to be better adapted for the disabled or if you encounter hindrances in the university buildings you are welcome to contact the servicecenter.
 checking accessibility
 every year the university carries out an inspection of the accessibility to both the campus and the centre for production technology ptc. this inspection is part of the universitys systematic working and study environment project. we use a special checklist for this process and after the inspection a plan of action is drawn up with measures to be taken to deal with shortcomings that have been revealed.
 audio induction loops
 audio induction loops can be found in the following rooms c118120 f104 f105 f123 f131 and f306. portable loops can be borrowed too. contact the servicecenter or visit us on campus.
 parking for the disabled
 there are five parking places for the disabled near the main entrance where the servicecenter is located building g at gustava melins gata 2 and near the entrance facing the travel centre building j there are six parking places. parking is free under the condition that you have a valid handicapped parking permit.
 there are six entrances with automatic doors on the ground level.
 the main entrance f122
 the entrance at the service centre
 the entrances c101 d101 f119 and f120
 there are eight lifts on campus spread out between building b to j and they are close to the entrances.
 accessible public restrooms
 the campus has fifteen restrooms that are adapted for the disabled hwc. three of them also have showers. restrooms are spread out between buildings b to j.
 f017 has a changing table lift from building h level 1 b108 c128 light garden d106 entrance to building d e128 has a changing table near the restaurant f115 albertsalen h126 the creative centre shower  stool c216 d208 d236 the library h204 shower  stool i206 h304 i306 and i406  shower.
 building f level 0 room nr 017 and c128 in building c level 1 rum 128 and so forth.
 students have access to a quiet room on level 3 in building d. this room d308 is locked. to gain access to the room you need to go to the service centre and sign out a card key which gives you access to the quiet room.
 fire and evacuation paths
 the campus has technologically safe buildings. we have automatic fire alarms sectioned off fire compartments and a sprinkler system. the evacuation plan is a great help in getting to know how best to deal with an evacuation.  evacuation plans are posted near the entrances corridors and large lecture halls. there are evacuation paths and emergency stairs marked with green arrows on the evacuation plan.
 in the case of an evacuation if you are unable to find a way out and cannot get help a temporary place to wait for help can be in the lobby in an air lock or on the landing of a staircase.
 a temporary place of refuge while you wait for help is a space near an emergency exit where people can stay for a short amount of time. it is understood that first responders will get to you via an emergency exit and help any disabled persons to exit. it is important to note that this temporary place of refuge is only for those who cannot exit on their own. those who can do stairs are expected to exit without the help of first responders.
 coordinated service for the entire university. the service center is located on the entrance floor in building g and offers service and support to students visitors and employees at university west.
 general information
 accommodation nyris13
 university west suggests that the delegates stay at any of the following hotels or the hostel in trollhättan. all the hotels are situated in the town center close to public transportation and within walkingdistance to the university. for more information check out each hotel information.
 hotel scandic swania
 hotel scandic swania is compared to clarion collection hotel kung oscar a bigger more continental hotel with a restaurant and a bar. the hotel has 200 rooms decorated in an elegant and modern style. at the hotel you can enjoy a dip in the indoor pool work out in the gym relax in the sauna or enjoy a delicious dinner at the onsite restaurant. the hotel is situated in the town center close to public transportation and in walking distance to the nyris13 venue.
 booking code is nyris
 to make your reservation please contact the hotel by phone or send an email to swania@scandichotels.com
 clarion collection hotel kung oscar
 clarion collection hotel kung oscar is a smaller hotel with a genuine family atmosphere. the hotel has no restaurant but a bar. the hotel has 80 rooms decorated in an elegant and modern style. at the hotel you can enjoy facilities such as the bar and a sauna. an evening buffet is served in the bar and included in the price mondaythursday. the hotel is situated in the town center close to public transportation and with in walking distance to the nyris13 venue.
 albert kitchen hotel  conference
 welcome to the albert hotel with the citys most beautiful location the hotel has 27 single  double rooms and one suite at our 4star hotel that is swan labeled. all rooms have their own balcony  terrace and are equipped with carpe diems quality beds from lysekil.
 we offer a gastronomy and a service that is at the forefront. during the summer you can sit on the terrace and enjoy breakfast overlooking the rapids and the whole älvrummet below. albert has a genuine atmosphere and at home feeling. at the same time you live in a modern environment of maximum comfort and standard.
 booking code is nyris. please call or email info@alberthotell.com for room reservation.
 right in the center of trollhättan is hotell bele sweden hotels. it has come and gone guests here since 1938th. the hotel is a quiet haven with immediate access to shopping areas restaurants and culture. hotell bele is a 3star breakfast hotel with 31 rooms. the hotel is situated in the town center close to public transportation and in walking distance to the nyris13 venue.
 booking code is nyris. please call or email info@hotellbele.se for room reservation.
 best western hotel trollhättan is a hotel with 54 all nonsmoking rooms. around the corner of the hotel are a variety of restaurants and shops. we invite all guests to enjoy a coffee break in the afternoon. each morning an inspiring sound and healthy tina nordströms famous swedish chef breakfast i served.the hotel is situated in the town center close to public transportation and in walking distance to the nyris13 venue.
 booking code is nyris. please call or email info@hoteltrollhattan.se for room reservation.
 cracking phenomena in welding and additive manufacturing 2025
 participants are welcome to book their stay at scandic swania. rooms have been prebooked and with our booking codes you will get a discount on your stay.
 scandic swania is located by the waters of trollhätte canal and offers close access to many wonderful nature areas by foot. the hotel is only a couple of blocks away from drottningtorget square. scandic swania offers an indoor pool gym and sauna and in the morning you will enjoy a nice breakfast buffet.
 the guests book their rooms on the scandic website  or by calling scandic central reservations at 46 08 517 517 00 dial tone 1. the booking code must be provided at this step. guests use code btro090325
 single room 1290 seknight double occupancy 1490 seknight
 the guest needs to provide credit card information at the time of booking to guarantee their room. payment is made by the guest to the hotel in connection with the stay.
 the guest can change andor cancel their room until 6pm on the day of arrival. last day for booking is 9th of january 2025.
 thermal spraying and engineering ab
 gkn aerospace sweden ab
 achmad ariaseta
 classrooms and studios
 active learning classroom  alc
 round tables chairs with wheels several whiteboards and digital screens. active learning classrooms are very different from the classic classroom.
 in an active learning classroom alc students sit at round tables instead of in classic lecture arrangement and this gives greater group dynamics and flexibility. with the help of tablets and mobile phones the working groups can connect to each other on a large screen and share ideas and materials with each other. for example the teacher has better opportunities to support and follow group work than when students work in separate group rooms. the groups can interact in different ways and learn from each other. the teacher can also follow the students discussions and thus measure their knowledge. the active learning classroom is also suitable for course introductions. with the help of technology students can quickly get to know each other in a playful way.
 there are three active learning classrooms at university west.
 42 seats and 7 tables  h104
 the students connect wirelessly to the screens. the screens are interactive. between the gray markings the walls are covered with whiteboard wallpaper. the carpet dampens the sound to a comfortable level in the room.
 30 seats and 5 tables  e203
 the students connect wirelessly to the screens. between the gray markings the walls are covered with whiteboard wallpaper.
 24 seats and 4 tables  f413
 our smallest alc. to use the screens the students connect an hdmi cable to their computer. between the gray markings the walls are covered with whiteboard wallpaper.
 book an icthour with an ict educational developer. state that you want an introduction to alc and book one of the classrooms at the same time.
 during an introduction you learn how to use the technology in the room but you also get a pedagogical approach that is suitable for the classroom. we demonstrate examples of ways to let your students work around the tables and how you can easily share material between the tables and give ideas about the use of the whiteboard surfaces.
 if you have questions about alc contact the ict educational developers at akademus.
 further reading
 teacher guides
 h104 and e203
 activities for international students
 university west offers several activities and events for all students during the academic year. the events listed below are for international students only. they are the perfect opportunity to learn more about sweden and to meet your fellow students from around the world. more events will be published throughout the year.
 a perfect afternoon to enjoy the amusement park in gothenburg and connect with your new friends. the university will arrange the bus and the entrance tickets.
 when begininng of may  beginning of september
 language cafe currently digital
 a meeting place for people who want to exchange experiences and learn swedish while enjoying a swedish fika.
 when check out the dates herewhere student café chouse campus
 shopping at ikea cancelled for 202021
 after your arrival in trollhättan you might need to buy few things that you couldnt pack in your luggage. this is why the student union plans an afternoon to accompany international students to ikea.
 when at the beginning of the semester
 of course everyone is welcome at open lab but the activities are mainly aimed to students. we will have training and workshops in the areas where there is interest and need.
 if you have wishes in other workshop themes just let us know. below we present ongoing days and times for various courses and workshops.
 adaptebm står för  advanced process development of electron beam melting of titanium for manufacturing of future aeroengine parts.
 thomas hansson
 professor
 adaptation to the power system of the future for small and mediumsized companies
 the project aims to spread knowledge among smaller companies about the need for future control of consumption and how financial control tools optimally utilized can provide great financial benefits.
 the ongoing electrification poses major challenges both for load flows and the stability of the power system which means that there is expected to be an increasing demand for controllability at the same time that electricity prices will increase and fluctuate more. knowledge of financial control tools for the power system is very limited in smaller companies and it is uncertain how existing facilities are affected by increased control.
 the project aims to spread knowledge among smaller companies about the need for future control of consumption and how financial control tools optimally utilized can provide great financial benefits. different businesses are studied to analyze how existing installations and new investments can be used to achieve increased controllability which can result in both reduced costs for purchased electricity and revenue from system services. the project aims to study how different businesses can optimize consumption energy storage and production as well as to implement several pilot projects in collaboration with local companies.
 information
 universitetslektor                        docent  associate professor in production systems
 professor                        professor of material science and director production technology
 additive manufacturing  new way building components
 when performing additive manufacturing completely new components are produced by melting metal wire using welding technology. layer upon layer of melted wire is deposited until the desired shape is reached. when additive manufacturing is fully developed it will be possible to build lighter components quicker and at lower cost. there will also be greater freedom in the design process. it will be possible to utilize new materials and construct objects not previously conceivable.
 additive manufacturing of high temperature materials and assessment of weldability ammaw
 the interest in additive manufacturing am has skyrocketed the last ten years not at least due to the fact that am enables a way to tailor components with respect to weight and cost reductions highly relevant for e.g. the aerospace industry. however there are many things to pay attention to as a new manufacturing method has come to live. every manufacturing process have its own very characteristics in terms of how it influence the materials microstructure which in turn also have consequences on the outcome of the following manufacturing steps and finally also the mechanical properties. one such example is the fact that the component which is to be manufactured by am is limited to the size of the build chamber. this means that it most often will need to be joined together to other parts of other material forms e.g. wrought cast usually by welding. it is therefore of prime concern to fundamentally understand how am as material form behaves in welding being the main task in the present project. the component in focus is a laser welded turbine rear frame made from smaller parts by am. the material is the nickel based superalloy 718. the phd student the one who mainly will take on the task in fundamentally understand weldability of ammanufactured alloy 718 is together with the supervisors working at university west in trollhättan. the phd student is also planning to spend some time at university of manitoba in winnipeg canada to carry out advanced microscopy.
 additive manufacturing parttime campus adt110
 additive manufacturing 7.5 hp
 additive manufacturing am broadly known as 3d printing is transforming how products are designed produced and serviced. am enables ondemand production without dedicated equipment or tooling unlocks digital design tools and offers breakthrough performance and unparalleled flexibility across industries. but knowledge remains one of the biggest barriers to ams wider adoption. so how can you leverage the potential of am to drive innovation?
 the am course offered at university west will give you the knowledge and confidence to architect and implement innovative uses of am across the product life cycle and accelerate your career in this rapidly emerging field. the aim is to establish a basic understanding of additive manufacturing am as an industrial method for the manufacture of advanced parts. the course covers pre and postprocessing product design process knowhow materials selection and basic aspects of manufacturing of metallic and polymeric products with respect to materials and processing technologies.
 after completing the course the student shall be able to
 discuss and analyze the basic principles and capabilities for additive manufacturing processes for metallic and polymeric materials.
 propose basic geometric designs for additive manufacturing.
 understand the latest trends and business opportunities in additive manufacturing.
 show awareness of sustainability aspects in additive manufacturing.
 first cycle
 general entry requirements and approved result from the following coursecourses
 mtk200materials science and engineering and
 roa200robotics and automation or the equivalent.
 additive manufacturing processes parttime campus adt610
 additive manufacturing processes 7.5 hp
 the additive manufacturing processes course offered at university west will give you the knowledge and confidence to architect and implement innovative uses of am across the product life cycle and accelerate your career in this rapidly emerging field. the aim is to establish a basic understanding of additive manufacturing am as an industrial method for the manufacture of advanced parts. the course covers knowledge of additive manufacturing processes materials selection as well as basic aspects of manufacturing of metallic and polymeric products with respect to materials and processing technologies.
 bachelor of science degree in materials science and engineering mechanical engineering chemical engineering manufacturing engineering production technology or equivalent. in addition at least 7.5 he credits in materials science at least 15 he credits in mathematics and english 6 or equivalent are required.
 additive manufacturing with powder as an additive
 the actual project aim to study the process stability and its influence on material defects and to some extent also mechanical properties. the alloys and process of interest are alloy 718 carpenter 2169 and selective laser melting powder bed respectively. the powder bed method has great potential in product development and manufacturing of complex parts for aerospace and space industries. the powder bed method has less environmental impact in comparison with conventional manufacturing methods especially in terms of less materials usage in relation.
 adherence to pharmacological therapy in adolescents with adhd and asthma
 the aim is to investigate how personality the patients perception of the disease and treatment affect adherence to longterm pharmacological treatment in adolescents with adhd and asthma.
 adherence as a multidimensional phenomenon includes factors related to the patient the condition treatment health system and the socioeconomic conditions. low adherence to longterm treatment affects the treatment and in turn affects the health and function. previous studies have shown that personality the patients perception of the disease drug  side effects and quality of care are important factors that affect adherence behaviour. when it comes to adhd and asthma among youth there are a number of knowledge gaps in these areas.
 the aim is to investigate how personality the patients perception of the disease and treatment affect adherence to longterm pharmacological treatment in adolescents with adhd and asthma. the sample of the study will consist of adolescents with adhd and asthma 150 each aged 1317 years who have contact with youth psychiatry respectively paediatric allergy unit. young people and their carers will be asked to fill out questionnaires separately on compliance and understanding of adhd  asthma associated with ambulatory visits. this includes questionnaires on their perception of drugs if the treatment had been of help as well as side effects and personality traits.
 the significance of the increased knowledge about the factors that affect adherence behaviour may lead to the correct support measures are introduced which in turn provides better adherence and health.
 bachelors and masters programmes
 voices about university west
 why did you apply to the master in finance at university west?
 i already had some knowledge in accounting  auditing from my bachelor but i always felt the urge to learn more depth of finance. the main reason for me to choose this master in finance is the course contents and the advantage of finishing the entire program in a year. i think that is the time advantage to enter to the job market earlier with the skill set i gained.
 is it what you thought is should be and how was that or is it different?
 the programme structure makes it way easier than i thought it would be. it is really nice that it is possible to have leisure time other than time for studies. i am so happy that i had a chance to enjoy the sweden and also finish my master here. the flexibility given and extracurricular activities you easily can schedule is the best combination for me as an international student.
 what do you think about the student life in trollhättan?
 before i came to trollhattan i already had some information about the history and the magical view of the city but when i came here i was amazed. i have been in other big cities in sweden and this city is so nice for studens. the transport with bike is easy because the distance between places is so small and the bike roads has nice scenery. nice or rainy weather does not matter trolhattän has a nice nature and nice public places to enjoy. the infrastructure created in the forests really surprised me. on every corner you have a park or just bbq places where you can have fun with your friends.
 when i feel a bit stressed or want to chill a bit i just go to the highest point of the city where you can see a really nice sunset. especially for me coming from a really urban city life trollhattan is a better place to live. it is always possible to find a pleasant corner to listen to nature a bit or to have some drinks with an excellent view.
 what are you doing when you are not studying?
 even though i came here with lots of uncertainties till the last minute because of the covid19 the outdoor activities you can enjoy in trollhattan covered all my needs. i really liked to listen to music and bike around the city to explore new places. every time i found some nice neighborhood or some deer walking around which made my day. other than that in summer i played a lot of disk frisbee or volleyball with my international friends here. in wintertime because here there is a lot of close lakes who are fully frozen i did a lot of ice skating. this is the first time i did that much ice skating and i can say learned a lot from my swedish friends.
 the most magical thing i have done is to have a trip to abisko to see the northern lights and stay outside in that freezing weather with our hot drinks. i was lucky enough to see aurora two days in a row and the milky way of stars. i never imagined that falling stars are such a common phenomenon but we have seen a lot of those too. the reindeers scared us a bit and that is also a thing i will remember when i leave sweden.
 it is also important to mention that swedish people really knows how to decorate their houses with lights. considering the dark winter days here it was exciting to see lots of decorated winter gardens. the design and the colors of their houses are really great i liked the scandic style of houses very much.
 to sum it all up sweden for sure is a destination to come back one day again. it is a bit hard to say it now when or where that will be but i am certain and eager to work and live here. especially stockholm is unbelievable. it is a so wellpreserved urban city in which you can also feel like you are in the countryside.
 i hope i will come back here soon and enjoy the swedish way of living with less stress and more inner peace. the change in my mindset is so great i am much more productive and less anxious about challenges.
 this project is intended to be a fellowship in academy by an employment of 20 at the division of subtractive and additive manufacturing. the aim is that the fellow from gkn aerospace will contribute with industrial knowledge about quality assurance and competence within nondestructive evaluation nde processes especially of gas turbine components.
 both new tools such as industrial computed tomography and robotized phased array ultrasonic inspection for am parts as well as linking insitu pbf inspection and monitoring to capability of quality assurance will be addressed in the project. in addition the fellowship in academy will take part in the education as expert lecturer within advanced am courses especially within quality assurance and methods for nde inline with the universitys intention to strengthen work integrated learning by academyindustry exchange of knowledge.
 adjunct lecturer anders thibblin
 in order to maintain its pioneering position the thermal spray ts group needs to expand its activities in diverse areas and applications. one of the important application areas is automotive industry where the ts group has limited activities today despite great potential for collaborative projects.
 strategic collaboration with key industrial partners in automotive sector can support the ts group in expanding its activities. dr. anders thibblin at scania has therefore been identified for this position of adjunct senior lecturer in thermal spraying since he has a phd in the field of ts coatings for automotive applications. scania is one of the largest and most innovative automotive companies in sweden and is the only one in sweden that has ts in their production facility and has a long experience of ts. the management at scania sees great potential in ts coatings for various applications and wants to grow in this area.
 the goals of this recruitment are
 identify and implement new areas of thermal spray applications in automotive industry
 develop strategic partnership between academia and industry with long term development approach
 the subproject must review and qualityassure regulations routines and processes linked to all digital examinations.
 this means reviewing and creating processes and routines for teachers students and students with special educational support. it also means ensuring correct and secure information handling such as archiving thinning and disclosure of theses and answers.
 adnan agic about  sicomap
 adopt  flexible control of high power laser processes through the use of a deformable mirror
 the adopt project proposes to exploit the recent progresses of the deformable mirror dm technology enabling to adapt in real time  on a millisecond timescale  the shape andor the beam energy distribution of a highpower laser beam lb to achieve the ambitious goal of increasing the robustness of lb welding and lb additive manufacturing.
 such an approach is highly innovative and never attempted before. deformable mirror systems offer a unique and novel actuation of the spatial power density distribution and opens for completely new ways of controlling the lbprocess in realtime. the deformable mirror technology can be seen as a completely new type of actuator and the system properties need careful investigations.
 advanced c programming 7.5 hp
 a course for those who have good basic skills in programming. the course expands your skills in programming and will work with programming constructs and concepts used in professional development. the course first deals with general concepts to give a deeper understanding of data types advanced coding concepts inheritance and the builtin class libraries. furthermore it covers database connections with entity framework and the linq query language.
 the programming language is c  and development is done in visual studio. prior knowledge in c  is an advantage but not necessary. however good knowledge of the basics of programming and object orientation is a prerequisite.
 wpb301programming web applications and
 gpa130fundamental programming with an objectoriented language or the equivalent.
 advanced heat insulating coating
 these coatings are called tbcs thermal barrier coatings. better tbcs allow higher combustion temperatures. this means lower fuel consumption and emissions which of course is more environmentally friendly.
 nicolas currychrister perssonsanjay sampathrobert vaßenping xiao
 iv  internationalisering
 msc robotics and automation
 robotics and automation
 double degree studies possible during 2nd year of studies
 germanyuniversity of applied sciences kaiserslautern
 austriauniversity of applied sciences upper austria
 germanytu dortmunduniversity of applied sciences kaiserslautern
 advanced materials science 6 hp
 this course gives you a broad and deeper insight to materials science basics and its connection to various manufacturing processes as well as possible applications. to select an appropriate material is a crucial task in engineering design that is for some applications choosing a material having a desirable or optimum property or combination of properties. by selecting the proper material as well as manufacturing process you can reduce costs and improve performance. parts of this decision process involve deciding on the constraints of the problem and from these establishing criteria that can be used in materials selection to maximize performance.
 intended audience
 this course is suitable for graduate students with science applied science engineering or related degrees interested in pursuing a career in development or exploitation of materials and manufacturing graduates currently working in industry keen to extend their qualifications or individuals with other qualifications who possess considerable relevant experience. the course is developed to meet the needs of industry and have a strong input from experts in their sector with an advisory panel from wellknown companies such as gkn aerospace esab and volvo cars.
 metallic materials within the groups of steels titanium superalloys and aluminium will be of special emphasize.
 degree of bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering industrial engineering or equivalent. the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a at least 7.5 he credits of materials science and at least 15 credits of mathematics including basic knowledge of analysis linear algebra and statistics. in addition verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english b english 6 in the swedish high school or equivalent.
 area of strength production technology
 advanced nondestructive testing  evaluation  level 2
 nondestructive testing and evaluation can be useful in several industries such as manufacturing industries that invest in additive manufacturing and other new manufacturing methods. this is becoming increasingly important because the competitiveness of the production systems of the future will largely be qualitybased. at university west we develop simulation models and tools that ensure product quality in additive manufacturing in various metallic materials and composites.
 develop and experimental validation of mathematical models  of different nde methods.
 apply mathematical modelling in the development of ndt as a tool for material characterization ndc and new ndt techniques
 inspection of metal additive dedlmd pbf and binder jetting.
 welds castings and repairs.
 inservice inspections isi
 x. lei h. wirdelius and j. carlson modelbased parametric study of surfacebreaking defect characterization using halfskip total focusing method j. nondestructive evaluation vol. 4237 2023.
 m. sahl h. wirdelius and a. rosell  nondestructive evaluation of additively manufactured component  additive manufacturing of highperformance metallic materials elsevier 2023.
 lindgren e zach c deeplearningbased outofdistribution data detection in visual inspection images proc. spie 12489 nde 4.0 predictive maintenance communication and energy systems the digital transformation of nde 1248909 25 april 2023 la us.
 x. lei h. wirdelius and a. rosell. simulation based investigation of a probability of detection pod model using phased array ultrasonic testing paut technique journal of nondestructive evaluation 41 40 2022. 50.
 lindgren e zach c. industrial xray image analysis with deep neural networks robust to unexpected input data. metals 2022 12 1963.
 c. schwerz a. raza x. lei l. nyborg e. hryha h. wirdelius insitu detection of redeposited spatter and its influence on the formation of internal flaws in laser powder bed fusion. additive manufacturing 47 2021 102370.
 x. lei h. wirdelius and a. rosell. experimental validation and application of a phased array ultrasonic testing model on sound field optimization journal of modern physics 12.4 2021 391407.
 lindgren e.  zach c. 2022. industrial xray image analysis with deep neural networks robust to unexpected input data. metals 1211 19631963.
 lindgren e zach c. autoencoderbased anomaly detection in industrial xray images. proceedings of the 2021 48th annual review of progress in quantitative nondestructive evaluation. 2021 48th annual review of progress in quantitative nondestructive evaluation. virtual online. july 2830 2021. asme.
 ultrasonic testing of components produced with additive manufacturing  towards improved detection and classification of defects mikael sahl. finansierat av kkstiftelsen.
 ultrasonic material characterization phd student starts 240901 ssm.
 simsundt 3.0  an upgrade of the ut simulation software simsundt mikael sahl and håkan wirdelius ssm.
 advanced nondestructive testing  evaluation
 nondestructive testing ndt is the detection of defects in components without destroying them. with the help of various techniques such as ultrasound xrays and eddy currents it is possible to find cracks and other defects in metals and at the same time find out what type of defect it is how big it is and where it is located.
 nondestructive testing is used as an evaluation tool nde to detect position size and characterize service induced defects in the nuclear power industry and the aerospace industry where quality requirements are extremely high. small cracks in metal can grow over time and have catastrophic consequences if for example they occur in the pipes of nuclear power plants or in the turbine blades of an aircraft engine.
 news articles  films
 wants to facilitate the industry in identifying material defects
 the technology used to detect cracks in nuclear power plants may soon also be used for quality control within the manufacturing industry.
 håkan wirdelius professor in nondestructive testing
 nondestructive testing leads to more efficient use of materials.
 oskar tofeldt doctor in nondestructive evaluation
 thematic leader  advanced nondestructive evaluation
 advanced project in development of master programme in welding mweld
 bachelors degree of 180 he credits with 90 he credits in the major subject field of economics with at least 75 he credits in finance at intermediate level and 7.5 he credits in econometrics or statistics or equivalent.
 alternatively a bachelors degree of 180 he credits with 90 he credits in the major subject field of business administration with at least 75 he credits in micro economics and 7.5 he credits in macro economics and at least 75 he credits in finance at intermediate level and 7.5 he credits in econometrics or statistics or the equivalent.
 verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english 6 in the swedish upper secondary school or equivalent
 advanced topics in computer engineering parttime campus dta400
 advanced topics in computer engineering 7.5 hp
 the course gives a scientific orientation about selected field within computer engineering. in seminars we read discuss and evaluate published scientific articles. at the same time you carry out a simulation project and report your results in a form similar to a scientific article.
 the following subjects are among others treated network technology computer engineering security distributed systems test and evaluation methodology simulation methodology and scientific methodology.
 completed course requirements of 60 credits in computer engineering.
 advanced welding processes parttime campus asp700
 advanced welding processes 4 hp
 the course will introduce knowledge regarding different conventional welding processes and related topics such as
 electron beam welding
 plasma welding
 cutting drilling and other edge preparation techniques
 surfacing and spraying
 mechanized processes and robotic welding
 joining processes for plastics
 joining processes for ceramics and composites
 ksp600conventional welding processes or the equivalent.
 internship and studies abroad
 after the exchange
 when you have returned home you should normally apply for a credit transfer of your studies abroad. credit transfer means that the university determines what the credits you have taken abroad correspond to in your program studies towards your degree at university west and that these are entered in ladok.
 in order for you to be able to have your coursescredits from the study abroad transferred in your degree at home you need to apply for this. you can find more information on the web pages for credit transfer.
 you will need to complete an evaluation of your studies abroad and should you have been granted a scholarship through us you will also need to complete a short travel report. you will receive information from us at the international office in due time.
 if you are interested in sharing your abroad experiences with other students do not hesitate to contact us. we are always looking for students who can assist during our international week and other information sessions we have on studies and internship abroad. do contact us at international@hv.se
 if you have completed studies or an internship abroad without financial support from any of our scholarship programmes you may have the possibility to apply for a travel scholarship.
 agency gender and intercultural encounters of children and young people a case study of a football club
 the project has the form of a case study and examines strategies and approaches a football club in their work with various social projects aiming to promote intercultural understanding inclusion equal opportunities and counteract effects of social and economic segregation and increase young peoples agency through participation in sports.
 peter korp university of gothenborgevacarin lindgren university of gothenborg
 staff member at section for nursing  undergraduate level.
 staff member at division of industrial automation.
 artificial and human intelligence through learning ahil
 ahil work packages
 wp 1  project management and dissemination
 wp 2  experiments with machine learning applications  case a
 well performing machines are important to ensure high quality and to avoid unscheduled or unnecessary production stops. production stops due to failing equipment decreases the productivity and might hurt product quality and increase costs.
 maintenance relies heavily on monitoring of the production process and collection of the related data.
 the technological advances made during the last decades within the internet of things iot big data machine learning ml and artificial intelligence ai have made it possible to continuously monitor and analyze thousands of machine parameters. these technologies create new possibilities for improving the maintenance process. in general machine learning and artificial intelligence have a significant role in industry 4.0. ml and ai represent new requirements to the process of data collection in order for the entire system of predictive maintenance to function correctly. in particular the data must conform to the principles of validity accuracy completeness consistency and uniformity. in the ahil project we will leverage these industry 4.0 technologies by prototyping a predictive maintenance application that satisfies the data collection and processing requirements as well as improves productivity of the manufacturing process.
 wp 3  experiments with production flow simulations  case b
 the complexity of introducing discrete event simulation as a new tool for decision making is highlighted where we emphasize the combination of technical and human knowledge and involvement yet necessary to understand and to draw conclusions from the collected and simulated data. there may be value in reflecting of the implication that human preconceptions may have on the results denoting that the data analysis and des models can be valuable when striving towards objectivity. the results also demonstrate that the data analysis has given valuable insights into production characteristics otherwise hard to pinpoint and this information can accordingly be addressed at the partner companies. thus the results reveal opportunities for how the initiative of introducing discrete event simulation as an anew tool in the wake of industry 4.0 can act as a catalyst for improved decision making in future manufacturing.
 wp 4  experiments with userdriven interfaces for datadriven decisions  case c
 wp 5  best practice for industrialization of ahil applications
 the digitalization of aiempowered manufacturing industry will have longterm effects on organizational strategic work and thus also affect how individuals  and the organization as a whole  choose to benefit and experience the transformation. learning processes within the organization can be threatened by low overall company support and lack of competence to handle new disruptive technology in production work. in this wp we will identify and understand the consequences and challenges for the industrialization and scaling up of ai initiatives. we will develop a strategic workintegrated learning model on how ai and datadriven applications such as those described in wp24 can be incorporated into an organizational learning approach in the context i4.0.
 ahil wp 2 production flow simulations
 production flow simulations
 specific concepts investigated
 utilizing rfidstickers on the products was proposed for reaching real time data model updates.
 coupling the des with statistical process control.
 incorporating an ai tool using neural networks into the des solution.
 both approaches spc and ai tool are aiming towards solving the same task of automatically analyze the performance of the production using des as a source of generating datainformation needed
 qualitative data was gathered in parallel with technical development resulting in 18 qualitative interviews with management shop floor personnel team leaders and support functions such as logistics managers and functions responsible for digitalization development. the results from investigating the humancentric aspects highlight the challenges of implementing and especially trusting digital tools. to realize the value of digital tools for production planning and control it is argued that it is imperative to simultaneously apply a humancentric perspective in decision making to ensure trustworthy sustainable and resilient humandatatechnology nexus implementations towards smart manufacturing.
 ahil wp 3 interactive user apps
 interactive user apps
 studies and results have departed from the increasing number of industrial digitalization systems interlinked to available production systems and the increased amount of input and realtime data generated from the shop floor.
 the focus of this work package has been on how new disruptive systems built on the industrial internet of things iot and sensorbased technologies measure machine status and systems status. specifically how datadriven and userdriven data are interrelated with everyday manual production work. hence to what degree production data are extracted aggregated and visualized for everyday decisionmaking which affects longterm business values.
 user studies of the iot systems copilot at gkn aerospace sweden ab and ontop at siemens energy ab trollhättan show that machine data system data and manualoperative decisions create challenges to practitioners and work routines but have created a more sustainable work environment improved production estimation and data aggregation.
 data collection during 20202022 included a total of 25 formalized sessions interviews field observations and focus groups in addition to regular meetings at both companies. general results show a need to further study the representation and augmentation of data and handle the complexity of realtime data with work practice in heterogeneous it infrastructures on the shop floor.
 ahil wp 4 phd student project
 linnéa carlsson phd student university west
 1. to uncover how managers perceptions of industrial digitalization affect manufacturing organizations strategic work.
 2. to uncover how employees perceptions of industrial digitalization affect manufacturing organizations strategic work.
 3. to understand how the implications of individual and shared understandings of digital technology based on the outcome of the first two objectives affect strategy formulation.
 in this thesis findings indicate that managers are desperately seeking an orientation toward industrial digitalization. strategy formulation remains a disparate action in a closed area within an organizations formal and informal structures. there is a lack of organizational enablers to face industrial digitalization within the following domains organizing and maintaining an adaptive culture learning and competence.
 thus this thesis emphasizes a more humancentric perspective in forming organizational capabilities in manufacturing organizational contexts toward implementing digital technologies.
 ahil wp 5  coproduction of learning seminars
 coproduction of learning seminars
 a learning seminarwebinar entitled change and leadership in datadriven production  development of copilot was arranged jointly by ptc kunskap and innovatum 13 december 2022.
 amanda dalstam and jon eklöf from gkn aerospace presented  the journey to develop lead and introduce the copilot platform. this platform has innovative machine data measurement and visualization system to meet the daily needs and decisions of operators technicians and managers at the workplace.
 ahil wp 6 studentindustry collaboration
 studentindustry collaboration
 seven student thesis works at bachelors and masters levels were completed during the ahil project based on a close collaboration and coproduction with industry partners.  the student thesis covered different areas such as industrial engineering informatics leadership and production logistics with simulation and machine learning.
 this thesis project was carried out with the aim of creating an understanding of how production flow simulation can be used as a sustainable activity to plan production and achieve more efficient planning at siemens industrial turbomachinery ab in trollhättan. based on the results that focused on outlining the production flow a conceptual simulation model was built that visualizes the production which is a starting point for further development and use of production flow simulations. it was concluded that the data collection aspects and its analysis were of large importance for preparation of building the model. it is of great value to have good insight into the production flow of the company and the conclusion stresses the importance of a detailed study of the production flow and to understand the production data before deciding on whether a simulation model should be built and the scoop of that model.
 saxin d. 2021. the industry 4.0 revolution and how the rise of machines have changed it departments.
 master thesis 15 hp in informatics university west
 nyberg e. 2021. modelling of production flow at siemens energy digital twin with a view towards real time data implementation. master thesis 30hp master programme in robotics university west
 hansson n. 2021. modelling of production flow at siemens energy digital twin with plans toward statistical process control. master thesis 30hp master programme in robotics university west
 moskalenko v. 2022. discrete event simulation of production flow at siemens energy  with focus on decision support system for statistical process control considering ai master thesis 30hp master programme in robotics university west
 optimisation of the production workflow is a complicated task since it is nearly impossible for a person to predict bottlenecks and rising cycle times. discrete event simulations are built with a purpose of monitoring and predicting such problems occurring. but all information from simulations should be analysed by a final user. in order to create a process for prediction and optimization two automated methods were developed in this project. the first method utilizes statistical methods for monitoring separate stations. the second method is using machine learning methods for analysing the whole simulation at once to investigate... machine learning algorithms should be able to tell if there will be issues in the station. such as growing cycle times buffer overfilling bottlenecks. the developed software performs and utilizes statistical and data analytical methods for monitoring and predicting such problems encountered in the workflow as growing cycle times growing variance process out of control bottlenecks.
 ai baserad kvalitetsstyrning och kontroll ai based quality control 2.5 hp
 the course provides an overview of artificial intelligence ai and how it can be applied in quality control applications. we cover the theoretical background but will focus mainly on practical applications of the concept. the aim is to provide a vision and basic knowledge of the covered topics for a target audience with no or few prior knowledge in the ai field. it will be discussed how quick and continuous process adjustments based on aibased quality control systems can improve production.
 professionals of the manufacturing industry who want to improve their theoretical and practical knowledge in quality control and ai based techniques.
 the course includes the following modules review of quality control techniques sensor data fusion introduction to ai and machine learning supervised and unsupervised learning supervised learning and deep learning project.
 three years of higher education bachelor level in engineering  technology bachelors degree corresponding to 180cp. alternatively relevant professional work experience.
 attach resume if your application is based on work experience. a template in swedish is available at our website
 implementation and pedagogic concept
 the course is based on university wests concept of work integrated learning which aims at integrating both theory and practice in education. theoretical lectures are combined with case studies and practical examples.
 the course format campus or distance can vary. the form is stated when the course being announced. the current courses can be found here.
 course registration via university wests website
 for more information please contact produktionskurser@hv.se
 aiempowered manufacturing organizations
 ail be a teacher
 master in workintegrated sustainable development
 master in workintegrated political studies
 cooperative education coop
 ncc industry
 mer information
 cooperative education
 coop cooperative education
 professor i ail
 akademus is planning educational talks about ai artificial intelligence and its possibilities for the spring. stay up to date with our newsletter and website.
 ai technology artificial intelligence and the latest tool chatgpt have recently been mentioned in a number of contexts. ai technology can generate academic texts in a matter of seconds which is being discussed and tested in a variety of forums. it has also been highlighted how universities can handle these tools in relation to examinations cheating and plagiarism as well as how they can be used as an aid for teachers such as when creating exam questions. there are currently many questions but few answers. all we know is that artificial intelligence is here to stay.
 below are links to ai news that explain and demonstrate what this means and how it can be used.
 the guardian fullon robot writing the artificial intelligence challenge facing universities
 professorer
 information om professorsinstallation
 information om ceremonin
 welcome to akademus day on august 29th the day is aimed at all teaching staff and employees with an interest in the development of higher education pedagogy. this year we will focus on studentcentered learning and generative ai.
 akademus day will be held entierly in swedish.
 those of you who will participate on site will be offered mingling refreshments and a light lunch. last day to register august 22.
 it is possible to participate online all day except for the workshops in the afternoon.
 9.00  9.15 vicechancellor mats jägstam welcomes you room f131.
 9.15  10.00 sonja bjelobaba  ethical use of ai in higher education room f131.
 10.00 mingling refreshments
 the morning continues with 3 parallel sessions in two 45 minute sessions
 10.2511.10 session 1 choose one of the following sessions
 podcast and video as a pedagogical tool j106
 teachers experiences with generative ai j111
 studentcentred learning j113
 11.1512.00 session 2 choose one of the following sessions
 quizzes in different pedagogical ways j106
 feedback fruits in canvas j111
 the effects of studying languages and knowledgedeveloping working methods j113
 12.0013.00 light lunch provided
 13.0013.45 parallel workshops choose one of the following workshops
 podcast thats how it works j106
 new quizzes in canvas j111
 create creative and engaging roleplaying games with generative ai j113
 14.0014.45 thomas hillman  a single interface for everything knowledge through generative ai room f131.
 14.4515.00 thank you for today
 akademus is a platform for teachers ongoing pedagogical development.
 akademus forms a platform for a variety of resources and services that all strive to support and inspire you as a teacher in your pedagogical development and stimulate engaging and qualitative teaching.
 higher education courses starting this fall
 the higher education pedagogy works to conduct courses and various forms of educational activities to enhance the quality of all the teaching conducted at university west. see all our fall courses and apply
 higher education pedagogy
 ict support
 media production
 there are a number of tools to facilitate your teaching. we have gathered information and guides for canvas zoom hv play padlet and powerpoint.
 read more about our specially equipped classrooms such as hybrid classroom and active learning classroom alc etc. use them to mix participants that are physically present or online.
 as good as possible for as many as possible by adapting the pedagogical material to accessibility and working with inclusive design you can create the best possible conditions for all of our students and also meet the legal requirement for accessibility.
 in teaching situations you face many different challenges and you may have several questions or want inspiration. themes of various kinds are gathered here but the common thread is your teaching.
 news tips and inspiration
 feedbackfruits now included in canvas
 news in canvas assign to in module
 news in canvasscreenrecording in speedgrader
 copy course material between courses
 news in canvas anonymous discussion
 podcasts for summer days
 new quizzes now available in canvas
 8 march
 participate in supervisor training of supplemental instruction
 creating images with generative ai
 canvas news spring 2024
 do all links in your canvas course work?
 news 12 december
 extended demo period for feedbackfruits
 news 22 november
 how does your course appear in the canvas app?
 news 21 november
 live recording of maktbarometern 2023
 news 15 november
 upgrading our hybrid classrooms
 news from the digital examination project
 news 9 october
 new feature in canvas submit for student
 new slideshow in padlet
 hidden grading becomes the default
 modified course menu in canvas
 a new security solution is offered in zoom meetings
 digital examination  come and test inspera
 30 march
 create engaging course material with lightboard
 10 march
 news 16 december
 news 2 december
 digital examination at university west
 news 27 september
 interactive tool for collaboration
 news 19 september
 save comments in speedgrader
 news 11 april
 higher education year 2040?
 video in teaching
 see all news
 feedback fruits i canvas j111
 5 muntlig examination
 standards and guidelines for quality assurance in the european higher education area esg 2015
 wingate u. 2018. academic literacy across the curriculum towards a collaborative instructional approach. language teaching 513 349364. doi.org10.1017s0261444816000264
 staff member at division of mechanical engineering.
 staff member at division of educational science and languages.
 publications
 a case study in using llms to generate safety texts for automatic hazard detection
 885 targeting fpr2 as a novel approach for immunotherapy in pancreatic cancer female patients  studies of sexual immune dimorphism in the tumor microenvironment
 a comparative analysis of industrial cybersecurity standards
 a collection of contradictory selves  the dialogical self and the dynamics of identity transformation
 a blind spot  reproduction of racism in educational landscapes
 a case study initiating discrete event simulation as a tool for decision making in i4.0 manufacturing
 23 years of the uddevalla symposium 19982020
 131 days to form a government  how was the government formation process represented according to the editorial sections in two liberal newspapers dagens nyheter and göteborgsposten after the election 2018?
 a back propagation network based mppt algorithm for gridtied wind energy system with vienna rectifier
 a 7day activity diary for assessment of daily energy expenditure validated by the doubly labelled water method in adolescents.
 3d scanning and modeling with the use of a mobile robot
 12th international symposium on renewable energy education proceedings
 a 3year followup study of swedish youths committed to juvenile institutions  frequent occurrence of criminality and health care use regardless of drug abuse
 100 years of swedish animation
 helena somvall sofia themsen
 3d models with product and manufacturing information  a step towards model based engineering
 3dscanning for weld distortion measuring
 3d modelling of a laser welding cell for movie presentation  making of the movie
 a comparative firewall study in terms of performance security and configuration
 3d vision guided automated masking amp demasking in industrial paint shops  evaluating photoneos vision technology in implementing robotic automation at vbg coupling systems
 600 fbombs per season  an appraisal analysis of various fucks in the wire and their translations
 a comparative pragmatics and discourse analysis of three conservative british prime ministers inauguration speeches
 a comparative study between traditional computing workstations and cloud virtual desktops
 a classification of different levels of flexibility in an automated manufacturing system and needed competence
 a case study of the implementation process of canvas learning management system in higher education
 a bridge over troubled water?  exploring learning processes in a transition program with newly graduated nurses
 elias shabo georges elboustany
 a blindspot  reproduction of racism in educational landscapes
 a biochemical study of erythrocytes in swedish families with betathalassaemia minor.
 a case study on displacement analysis of vasa warship
 a boundary practice perspective on cocreation of ict innovations
 a comparative study of corrosion resistance for hvafsprayed fe and cobased coatings
 a coherence of identities or an identity of coherence?  a review of the recent discussion on wellbeing social identities and integration in a multicultural context
 a combinatorial proof of associativity of ore extensions
 a case study of barriers to entry that swedish companies face in the brazilian market
 a comparative studey of mechanical properties between hvofspryed maxphase materials and plasma sprayed mcraiy coatings
 angelica fasth per nylen b. choi uta klement
 a characterisation tool for the impact of network deficiencies on hpc applications
 3d design and simulations of nasa rotor 67
 a case study evaluation of rdpm  a process confirmed successful
 linn g. christiernin stefan mankeforschristiernin a olsson andreas boklund
 show more publications
 university west summer school in collaboration with san josé state university usa
 migration hostcountry language learning and the influence of global english
 university westalastair henry pi
 cape breton university canadapeter macintyre
 motivational teaching in swedish secondary english motisse
 university westalastair henry picecilia thorsen
 investigations of the following topic areas have been carried out
 teachers motivational strategies  digital media creation and l2 motivation culturallyresponsive teaching and l2 motivation teacherstudent relationships and the influences on students motivation teachers selfdisclosure practices and the influences on students motivation teacher empathy and students motivation students engagement and disaffection motivation and project work
 henry a. sundqvist p.  thorsen c. 2019. motivational practice insights from the classroom. lund studentlitteratur.first chapter  pdf
 much of my work has focused on motivation to learn english. as well as empirical studies with an emphasis on motivational dynamics. i have also examined l2 motivation and student engagement in language classrooms.
 henry a.  cliffordson c. 2017. the impact of outofschool factors on motivation to learn english selfdiscrepancies beliefs and experiences of selfauthenticity. applied linguistics 38 5688712.
 thorsen c. henry a.  cliffordson c. 2020. the case of a missing person? the current l2 self and the l2 motivational self system. international journal of bilingual education and bilingualism.
 following on from my thesis work i have continued to examine the motivational effects of parallel language learning and the influences  positive and negative  of the simultaneous acquisition of two or more foreign languages. in particular i have examined the relationship between motivation and multilingual identity development.
 henry a. 2017. l2 motivation and multilingual identities. modern language journal 101 3 548565.
 henry a.  thorsen c. 2018. the ideal multilingual self validity influences on motivation and role in a multilingual education. international journal of multilingualism.  doi.org10.108014790718.2017.1411916
 henry a. 2020 advance access. learnerenvironment adaptations in multiple language learning casing the ideal multilingual self as a system functioning in context. international journal of multilingualism 118.
 iii directed motivational currents and longterm motivation dmcs
 a directed motivational current is a novel construct that captures highintensity motivation that endures over time. my work has involved the development and empirical validation of the dmc construct and the investigation of longterm motivational processes.
 henry a. davydenko s.  dörnyei z. 2015. the anatomy of directed motivational currents exploring intense and enduring periods of l2 motivation. modern language journal 99 2 329345.
 dörnyei z. henry a.  muir c. 2016. motivational currents in language learning frameworks for focused interventions. new york routledge.
 henry a. 2019. directed motivational currents extending the theory of l2 vision. in m. lamb k. csizér a. henry  s. ryan eds the palgrave handbook of motivation for language learning pp. 139161. palgrave macmillan.
 henry a. 2020. possible selves and personal goals what can we learn from episodic future thinking?. eurasian journal of applied linguistics 63 481500.
 iv teacher identities and professional development
 as a teacher educator i am interested in all aspects of identity development during preservice education. my work has involved the application of complexity theories and the theory of the dialogical self.
 henry a. 2016. conceptualizing teacher identity as a complex dynamic system tensions during the practicum. journal of teacher education 67 4 291305.
 henry a. 2019. a drama of selves investigating teacher identity development from dialogical and complexity perspectives. studies in second language learning and teaching 92 263285.
 v language learning and migration
 globalization and increased transnational migration mean that growing numbers of adults find themselves learning additional languages either by choice or through circumstances not of their choosing. my work has focused on language choices in communication events motivation and the effects of lingua franca english on willingness to communicate in swedish.
 henry a. 2016. swedish or english? migrants experiences of the exchangeability of language resources. international journal of bilingual education and bilingualism 19 4 442463.
 henry a. 2016. enablements and constraints inventorying affordances associated with lingua franca english. international journal of bilingual education and bilingualism 19 5 488510.
 henry a.  davydenko s. 2020. thriving? or surviving? an approachavoidance perspective on adult language learners motivation. the modern language journal 1042 363380.
 vi digital technologies and students motivation
 digital technologies constitute an important dimension of language learning both within and beyond the classroom. my work has focused on the influences of digitallymediated experiences on motivation to learn english.
 henry a. 2019. online media creation and l2 motivation a socially situated perspective. tesol quarterly 532 372404.
 adolphs s. clark l. dörnyei z. glover t. henry a. muir c. sánchezlovano e.  valstar m. 2018. digital innovations in l2 motivation harnessing the power of the ideal l2 self. system. doi.org10.1016j.system.2018.07.014
 henry a.  lamb m. 2019. l2 motivation and digital technologies. in m. lamb k. csizér a. henry  s. ryan eds the palgrave handbook of motivation for language learning pp. 599619. london palgrave macmillan. the palgrave handbook of motivation for language learning  martin lamb  palgrave macmillan
 henry a.  thorsen c. 2019. engagement with technology gaming immersion and suboptimal experiences. technology in language teaching  learning 12 5267.
 dörnyei z. macintyre p. d.  henry a. 2014. motivational dynamics in language learning. bristol england multilingual matters.
 dörnyei z. henry a.  muir c. 2015. motivational currents in language learning frameworks for focused interventions. routledge. motivational currents in language learning frameworks for focused int routledge.com
 lamb m. csizér k. henry a.  ryan s. 2019. the palgrave handbook of motivation for language learning. london palgrave macmillan. the palgrave handbook of motivation for language learning  martin lamb  palgrave macmillan
 i collaborate with a number of colleagues at university west. in a recent project led by myself and åke persson professor of english literature seven members of the english department and 3 student alumni contributed to an anthology exploring work in english studies.
 henry a  persson å. in press. engaging with work in english studies an issuebased approach. london palgrave macmillan.
 outreach
 henry a. 2008. upside down a stories from the englishspeaking world. stockholm natur  kultur.
 henry a. 2009. upside down b more stories from the englishspeaking world. stockholm natur  kultur.
 henry a. 2013. turning points. århus systime.
 henry a. 2013. upside down. århus systime.
 in 2015 the echo books were shortlisted for the belma best european learning materials award. aim to recognise high quality educational materials that have been produced in any country in europe.
 teaching
 i teach language education on programs for primary secondary and upper secondary teachers. in addition i teach on courses in general education and supervise and examine undergraduate degree projects.
 marked on the voice  the visibility experiences of russian heritage migrants following the war against ukraine
 willingness to communicate multilingualism and interactions in community contexts
 alastair henry peter d. macintyre
 multilingualism and persistence in multiple language learning
 linda febring alastair henry
 vision and goal selfconcordance
 willingness to communicate and multilingualism  findings from a timeserialstudy
 alastair henry cecilia thorsen peter macintyre
 teachers relational practices and students motivation
 student engagement with digital video production
 willingness to communicate in a multilingual context  part two personcontext dynamics
 alastair henry cecilia thorsen peter d. macintyre
 authenticity at work  english teachers experiences of authentic and inauthentic acting
 alastair henry sofia olsén
 centrifugalcentripetal dynamics in the dialogical self  a case study of a boundary experience in teacher education
 alastair henry maria mollstedt
 possible selves and personal goals  what can we learn from episodic future thinking?
 thriving? or surviving?  an approachavoidance perspective on adult language learners motivation
 the palgrave handbook of motivation for language learning
 directed motivational currents  extending the theory of l2 vision
 engagement with technology  gaming immersion and suboptimal experiences
 alastair henry cecilia thorsen
 focus on the language learner  focus on the language learner
 andrew d. cohen alastair henry
 weaving webs of connection  empathy perspective taking and students motivation
 challenges in bridging between cultures of english experience
 motivational activities and identity work
 what motivates students?
 online media creation and l2 motivation  a socially situated perspective
 disaffection and agentic engagement  redesigning activities to enable authentic selfexpression
 can l2 motivation be modelled as a selfsystem?  a critical assessment
 alastair henry meng liu
 exploring language learners selfgenerated goals  does selfconcordance affect engagement and resilience?
 alastair henry cecilia thorsen mehmet sercan uztosun
 work integrated language learning  boundary crossing connectivity and l2 affordances
 accounting for longterm motivation and sustained motivated learning  motivational currents selfconcordant vision and persistence in language learning
 the dynamics of willingness to communicate change point analysis in the lab and the field
 alastair henry peter macintyre lanxi wang
 the other in the self  mentoring relationships and adaptive dynamics in preservice teacher identity construction
 willingness to communicate in a multilingual context  part one a timeserial study of developmental dynamics
 working with identity work  supporting professional identity development in teacher education
 introduction  engaging with worki n worlds of change
 alastair henry åke persson
 engaging with work in english studies  an issuebased approach
 learnerenvironment adaptations in multiple language learning  casing the ideal multilingual self as a system functioning in context
 alastair henry martin lamb
 introduction
 motivational teaching as a relational practice  three concepts three connections
 a drama of selves  investigating teacher identity development from dialogical and complexity perspectives
 alastair henry pia sundqvist cecilia thorsen
 motivation and funds of knowledge
 motivation and the importance of teacherstudent relationships
 understanding language learners motivation
 teachers selfdisclosures and influences on students motivation  a relational perspective
 the case of a missing person? the current l2 self and the l2 motivational self system
 cecilia thorsen alastair henry christina cliffordson
 active learning classroom alc
 active learning classrom
 in an active learning classroom alc groups sit at round tables instead of in a classic lecture seating. all groups have access to a screen and a whiteboard.
 using a computer tablet or mobile phone you can connect to your groups screen and share ideas and materials with each other. the connection is made in different ways depending on the device.
 the video shows how to connect your windows 11 pc to the screen. english subtitles available
 the video shows how to connect your windows 10 pc to the screen. english subtitles available
 connect an android phone
 the video shows how to connect your android phone to the screen. english subtitles available
 start by connecting to the eduroam wireless network. how to connect to eduroam.
 the video shows how to connect your mac to the screen. english subtitles available
 connect an iphone
 the video shows how to connect your iphone to the screen. english subtitles available
 connect an ipad
 the video shows how to connect your ipad to the screen. english subtitles available
 teacher guides to alc
 here you will find guides and instructions for the alc h104 and e203.
 if you have questions about alc want to book an introduction or deepen your knowledge contact the ict educational developers at akademus.
 content on this page
 click on the links to go directly to the section.
 get familiar with the classroom
 teacherled session
 shut down
 seating cards
 start the projector with the control panel on the wall. when the projector started the projector screen will automatically roll down.
 if the screens at the tables are turned off you can start them on the touch screen. the video shows how to do this. english subtitles available
 the classroom is equipped with round tables chairs with wheels for easily creating new groups and walls with whiteboard wallpaper. there is a storage cabinet with pens board erasers seating cards and an ipad. the ipad can be used to control the screens without being tied to the touch screen. the cabinet is equipped with a code lock.
 the video introduces the userfriendly system that controls the technology in the classroom. english subtitles available
 when students work in groups they can use the screen at their table. students can connect their computers tablets or phones wirelessly to the screen. there are instructions for how to connect at hv.sealc.
 when a group is to present the groups screen can be displayed on all screens in the classroom including the projector screen. the video provides instructions for this. english subtitles available
 during the walkthrough the image from your teacher computer is displayed on all screens in the room. you can to connect your computer via hdmi or wirelessly. watch the video on how to connect your mac or pc wirelessly. english subtitles available
 turn off the group screens via the touch screen according to the video. english subtitles available
 the projector is turned off on the control panel.
 charge the ipad if you have used it. charging cable is in the cabinet.
 in the locked cabinet there are cards in the same colors as the tables. these can be used for divide students into groups. hand out the cards as students enter the room.
 active learning classroom
 friends aperitivo and the warmth of the mediterranean
 meet alexander malmström studying human resources  work and organizational psychology at university west. his academic journey took an intriguing turn as he went on an exchange semester to northern italy liuc università cattaneo located in castellanza just outside milan.
 from left alexander in front of the schools logo. a part of the campus. alexander.
 reflecting on his stay in italy alexander expresses that the time here has been among the happiest and most rewarding experiences in a long time.
 alexander recalls  sprinting down the beaches of sicily after he and his friends climbed mount etna laying at a beach in switzerland casually enjoying the sun in october watching the sunset in corniglia after exploring the different towns of cinque terre speaking italian with newfound friends. the list goes on and on but my absolute favorite memory must be the first day in castellanza when i met those who i now consider my close friends.
 italy was a familiar destination to alexander still living there came with some surprises. the biggest surprise was realizing how laidback everything is. dolce far niente the sweetness of doing nothing is a concept ill always carry with me. this experience made me grow very fond of the overall italian lifestyle and its different values.
 the journey was not devoid of challenges with the notorious lack of punctuality in public transport and the discipline required for financial management topping alexanders list.
 as alexander bids farewell he fondly remembers having friends as neighbors eating italian food aperitivo traveling during the weekends speaking italian the warmer climate and partying with all the other students.
 practical guidance for aspiring exchange students
 alexanders endorsement for embarking on a similar venture is compelling  its hard to grasp the idea of what an exchange can offer you until you get to experience it yourself. knowing how amazing my exchange has been i would always encourage others to do it.
 just do it and if you dont like it  at least you know it isnt for you and you can always go back home. on the other hand it can also be one of the greatest things youve ever experienced. plus you might never get the chance to do something like this again so try to make the most of it and lastly enjoy life is meant to be enjoyed.
 alexandra bousiou
 staff member at grants and innovation office.
 algorithms and complexity parttime campus alk600
 algorithms and complexity 7.5 hp
 the overall goal of the course is to provide the students with tools to help them develop efficient algorithms for new problems. the first step is to formulate and analyze the computational problem. the next step is to select and modify data structures and techniques in order to formulate an algorithm. once the algorithm is analyzed for correctness and efficiency it can be implemented.
 the course deals with the concepts complexity on a deeper level than previous courses with respect to time as well as space. it presents techniques to evaluate the complexities for a given algorithm. the students learn about asymptotic functions and the complexity classes p np and npcomplete.
 the choice of appropriate data structures is essential for the design of efficient algorithms. the course introduces complex data structures such as heaps and graphs as well as operations on them.
 a few standard design techniques including greedy algorithms dynamic programming and divideandconquer are presented.
 bachelor of science in computer science computer engineering or software engineering. additionally the bachelor of science degree must include 15 he credits in programming 15 he credits in mathematics and one course in algorithms and data structures. verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english benglish 6 in the swedish upper secondary school high school or equivalent.
 ali abadi developed a new simulation model for metalbased am with laser and wire
 ali abadi has developed a model that simulates metal and heat transfer in additive manufacturing with titanium wire. the model makes it easier to control the manufacturing process. photo högskolan väst.
 simulation models save a lot of time and materials when developing manufacturing processes explains ali. i have developed a model that simulates metal and heat transfer in additive manufacturing with titanium wire. many different parameters affect melting and its important to understand what is happening in the process in order to keep it stable. the model makes it easier to control the process.
 close collaboration with gkn aerospace
 ali has worked closely alongside aerospace engine manufacturer gkn aerospace in trollhättan.
 using data from gkns physical experiments with titanium i have been able to further develop existing software he explains. to validate the results of the simulation we then carried out a large number of experiments.
 components for aerospace engines have extremely high quality requirements. before components can be brought into use manufacturing processes must be optimised to ensure that no defects exist or can arise in the materials. the simulation model developed by ali can be further developed for use in laser and wirebased am with other metals and for other products.
 i benefit extensively from my doctoral studies and my knowledge of simulation models in my new job as a simulation engineer at nibe in trollhättan. nibe manufactures products including heat pumps and faces very different challenges compared to the aviation industry. nevertheless several aspects of the development work are reminiscent of the work i have carried out within the aerospace industry.
 read ali abadis thesis
 staff member at division of psychology pedagogy and sociology.
 in addition to publishing articles in international scientific journals professor kazemi has among other scholarly work coedited three books välbefinnande i arbetslivet wellbeing in the workplace published in 2009 by studentlitteratur a theoretical approach to assess road safety campaigns evidence from seven european countries 2009 published belgian road safety institute and handbook of social resource theory 2012 published by springer. he is also the coauthor of uppdrag butikschef management in retail published in 2013 by liber which was nominated for the hr book of 2013 by the specialized magazine personal och ledarskap. professor kazemi has also made several contributions to four international specialized encyclopedias sociology of work an encyclopedia sage publications encyclopedia of human services and diversity sage publications international encyclopedia of social  behavioral sciences 2nd edition elsevier and the sage encyclopedia of economics and society sage publications.
 teaching and supervision
 his current teaching includes giving standalone courses in psychology e.g. intercultural work psychology as well courses at the study programme for human resource management personalvetarprogrammet.
 other academic qualificationsactivities
 publications by ali kazemi
 leadership studies human resource management hrm sustainability mindfulness subjective wellbeing positive psychology justicefairness decision makingsocial dilemmas personcentered care useroriented care
 introduktion till lean 35 hp
 logistik och supply chain management 15 hp
 include
 staff member at section for health promotion and care sciences.
 for information in english about getting involved in alumni activities at university west please click here
 alumni at university west
 as a former student at university west you are part of a larger community of alumni. its an academic community that stretches to all corners of the world.
 as a member of the university west alumni community you receive several benefits. for example you will have the opportunity to attend exciting breakfast lectures related to your area of education. you also have access to other alumni who will provide inspiration and a way to expand your professional network.
 as a member of our alumni network you receive information and invitations tailored to you as a former student at our university.
 join by registering here.
 you are important to us
 there are several ways that you can collaborate with the university and where you as part of the alumni community are a key player. worklife is an important part of our education as workintegrated learning wil is our profile. we are constantly working to strengthen contacts and expand the workliferelated elements of the education. you are an important part of these efforts.
 please do not hesitate to contact us if you want to
 be a guest lecturer at university west
 accept study visits to your workplace
 be a mentor to a student
 receive a coop student at your workplace
 help market university west at student recruitment events in your country
 be included in program councils related to our programs
 of course we hope that you visit our english website regularly. there are many open lectures given in english that you can attend. for more information please see our calendar.
 there are also several newsletters that you can subscribe to. right now most of them are in swedish but we are working on producing a general newsletter in english to help you stay in touch with us.
 read what our students and alumni have to say about studying at university west
 communications officer                        pr och samverkan
 the aim is to clarify the influence of plate processing parameters hot isostatic
 processing route and welding procedure on lowtemperature phase separations known as 475cembrittlement in highly alloyed duplex stainless steels base material and welds. as a result recommendations will be developed on how to avoid the embrittlement during materials processing.
 a recent study outokumpus datasheets and industrial experience suggest that lowtemperature phase separations in super duplex stainless steels 550c commonly referred to as 475cembrittlement can occur already after 3 min or even shorter times. these short aging times make the super duplex stainless steels very susceptible to hazardous toughness drop after processing such as hot working welding and hot isostatic pressing. this is therefore a practical concern for the industrial partners in this project. as the transformation occurs on a nanoscale detection of the phase separation is very difficult by normal destructive and nondestructive testing methods especially in its early stage. it is believed to be acontributing factor to unexplained poor toughness and even failure in critical applications. complex thermal cycles stresses as in welding different material processing routes and a heterogeneous microstructure can introduce conditions that are critical and leading to phase transformations. the project therefore is of greatinterest to the producers of wrought outokumpu stainless ab and hiped steel bodycote hot isostatic pressing ab and producers of welding consumables esab ab as well as their customers.
 amacts  additive manufacturing of actively cooled thermal shields
 the project aims at optmizing the performance of the acts pieces through an optimization of its constituent materials.
 administrative officer education
 staff member at study administration.
 ambassador seeks continued dialogue with university west
 on march 5 vicechancellor mats jägstam and professor per assmo met the swedish ambassador to south africa håkan juholt and martin jörnrud responsible for trade issues at the embassy during a digital meeting.
 the purpose of the meeting was to discuss how the embassy looks at how sweden and swedish companies and universities work with questions about the connection between academia and industry both within south africa as well as between sweden and south africa.
 during the meeting the development of the south africa sweden university forum sasuf was also discussed where martin jörnrud and ambassador juholt emphasized the need for a closer and more structured collaboration with business and not least swedish companies in south africa.
 håkan juholt pointed out the importance of sweden supporting strengthening and defending democracy in south africa where cooperation with academia and industry between sweden and south africa is a cornerstone.
 he also asked for feedback from the wil24 conference that university west is organizing together with south africas central university of technology in south africa on april 35.
 the ambassador also suggested continued dialogue and communication where the university was also welcomed to seek support from the embassy for further contacts and meeting spaces in south africa for example closer cooperation with the swedish work based program in south africa per assmo concludes.
 the aim of this avans project named ameco is to develop a 2year masters programme in advanced manufacturing engineering with coop education strategy. the programme is planned to start in sept. 2018.
 professor senior
 professor in welding technology
 the significance of supplementary shielding in waam of aluminium thin walls
 combined effect of the interlayer temperature with travel speed on features of thin wall waam under two cooling approaches
 effect of o2 content in argonbased shielding gas on arc wandering in waam of aluminum thin walls
 development and implementation of a software for wire arc additive manufacturing preprocessing planning  trajectory planning and machine code generation
 transferability of the working envelope approach for parameter selection and optimization in thin wall waam
 work envelope expansion and parametric optimization in waam with relative density and surface aspect as quality constraints  the case of al5mg thin walls with active cooling
 wire feed pulsation as a means of inducing surface tension metal transfer in gas metal arc welding
 effect of thermal management approaches on geometry and productivity of thinwalled structures of er 5356 built by wire  arc additive manufacturing
 concept of a novel path planning strategy for wire  arc additive manufacturing of bulky parts  pixel
 the potential of wire feed pulsation to influence factors that govern weld penetration in gma welding
 the effect of pulsed coldwire feeding on the performanceof spray gmaw
 a methodology to parameterize wire  arc additive manufacturing  a case study for wall quality analysis
 shubham dahat kjell hurtig joel andersson americo scotti
 exploring the use of switchback for mitigating homoepitaxial unidirectional grain growth and porosity in waam of aluminium alloys
 operational behavior of the switchback gmaw process using a mechanized rig for arc movement
 fibermetal laminate panels reinforced with metal pins
 residual stresses in arc welding  a holistic vision
 active power measurement in arc welding and its role in heat transfer to the plate
 a critical analysis of weld heat input measurement through a watercooled stationary anode calorimeter
 influence of the co2 content on operational performance of shortcircuit gmaw
 proposal and assessment of a multiple cyclecontinuous cooling transformation mccct diagram for wire arc additive manufacturing of thin walls
 pyrometrical interlayer temperature measurement in waam of thin wall  strategies limitations and functionality
 effect of the cmt advanced process combined with an active cooling technique on macro and microstructural aspects of aluminum waam
 universityindustry collaboration in curriculum design and delivery  a model and its application in manufacturing engineering courses
 inaccuracy in arc power calculation through a product of voltage and current averages
 exploring a locus of maximum metal transfer stability of the shortcircuiting gmaw process based on the reignition voltage peaks
 welding in the worldupdate 2021
 john c. lippold ing thomas bollinghaus americo scotti
 understanding the behavior of laser surface remelting after directed energy deposition additive manufacturing through comparing the use of iron and inconel powders
 welding thermal stress diagrams as a means of assessing material proneness to residual stresses
 thermal management in waam through the cmt advanced process and an active cooling technique
 concept and validation of an active cooling technique to mitigate heat accumulation in waam
 flux for hardfacing by submerged arc welding from ferrochromemanganese and slag from the simultaneous reduction of chromite and pyrolusite
 balancing waam production costs and wall surface quality through parameter selection  a case study of an almg5 alloy multilayernonoscillated single pass wall
 comparison of methods to correlate input parameters with depth of penetration in laser welding
 analysis of residual stresses resulting from the surface preparation for xray diffraction measurement
 a contribution to the study of negative polarity in gma welding
 appraisal of fibermetal laminate panels reinforced with metal pins deposited by cmt welding
 amfat  additive manufacturing  fatigue life calculation
 staff member at division of real estate economics and society.
 phd and associate professor of information systems
 safe spaces for immersive safety training in virtual reality  a phenomenological conceptualization
 a midrange theory for designing sustainable safe spaces of immersive learning environments  a designscience based gamification approach
 alexander herwix amir hajbolouri
 metarequirements for immersive collaborative spaces in industrial workplace learning  towards a design theory
 amir hajbolouri thomas winman lars svensson
 toward hybrid spaces for immersive experiences of workintegrated learning  an initial inquiry
 an information systems design theory for adaptabe elearning
 workintegrated learning in a doctoral course in informatics
 a design theory for builtin evaluation support
 a duality of digitalization  how can we understand the tension between professionals beliefs and affordances with digital services in civic orientation?
 designing for heterogeneous groups of endusers towards a nascent design theory
 designing a webbased education platform for swedish civic orientation
 the experience of immersive virtual reality  a phenomenology inspired inquiry
 alexander herwix amir hajbolouri matti rossi monica chiarini tremblay sandeep purao shirley gregor
 wickedness in designing it for integration work  a phenomenological account
 design principles exposition  a framework for problematizing knowledge and practice in dsr
 a proposal for minimum reusability evaluation of design principles
 revitalizing thoughts on theory theorizing and philosophizing in information systems
 conceptualizing the essence of presence in elearning through digital dasein
 conceptualizing the essence of presence in distance education through digital dasein
 how habermas philosophy can inspire the design of information systems  the case of designing an open learning platform for social integration
 imparting social values through elearning platform  a social learning approach
 collaborgeneous  a framework of collaborative ittools for heterogeneous groups of learners
 the phenomenon of feeling addicted to social media  why do we feel addicted to social media?
 amir parsian about sicomap
 meet amit mishra who talks briefly about his role at university west.
 tell us about your background
 i have a background in electronics engineering and have worked with noncontact sensors such as radar remote sensing. i have extensive experience in sensor system design and understanding of the data coming from the sensors. i am also interested in computer technology with a focus on ai such as bioinspired machine learning architectures which is a growing field.
 this topic is interesting because it has applications in many domains  everything from smart manufacturing to circular economy.
 what is applied ai?
 ai is used today for a number of different applications in the manufacturing industry e.g. for design optimization product development quality assurance of production preventive maintenance machine control and machine monitoring. there is also a wide range of ai techniques  everything from deep learning and cluster analysis to neural networks and vector machines.
 what are you focusing on going forward?
 sss100 15 hp
 intern information
 analysis and design with respect to electromagnetic compatibility parttime campus aek600
 analysis and design with respect to electromagnetic compatibility 2.5 hp
 this course gives you indepth knowledge of how electromagnetic fields affect vehicle components and you learn to develop technical solutions to minimize disturbances in the electric powertrain. in the course you will also learn to use finite element methods to analyze electromagnetic compatibility and its effect on the system.
 after completing the course you will not only have an indepth understanding of electromagnetic compatibility in electric vehicles but also the skills to analyze design and implement technical solutions in the field.
 industry and academia
 this course has been developed in collaboration with industry within the framework of one of our education projects. the project aims to provide advanced level courses to a mix of students and professionals in order to strengthen the competitiveness of swedish industry.
 we apply validation of work experience to see if you have skills that correspond to the eligibility requirements for the course. dont forget to attach your curriculum vitae if you are applying based on work experience the form is available on our website
 bachelors degree with a major in electrical engineering or equivalent. the firstcycle program shall include at least 3 credits in programming and 15 credits in mathematics. english 6.
 you also need approved result from the following coursecourses
 mem500modeling of electric machines and
 edf500electrical design of traction battery and
 eld500power electronics and electric drive systems or the equivalent.
 analysis of policy frameworks for children in care in south africa and sweden
 background
 anders challenges traditional ways of designing factories
 products and profitability usually determine the design of manufacturing systems and factories. but factories have a greater societal value than just producing says anders johansson recent doctor of production engineering at university west.
 with a holistic and longterm approach production units can be designed to strengthen competence supply in the region for instance.
 when companies invest in factories they usually focus on producing the right quality products at the right price and of a certain volume. the grounds on which decisions are made are based on financial values. but beyond manufacturing and products factories can also contribute to other value chains that benefit the company its customers and other stakeholders in the surrounding community.
 i have identified the different stakeholders that may exist around a manufacturing industry what added value the factory can contribute and how that can be taken into account when decisions regarding new investments in manufacturing systems and factories are to be made.
 as an industrial doctoral student at scania in södertälje anders has been able to study the development of the companys factories on different continents for several years.
 who and what are the existing stakeholders and added values?
 internally companies can benefit from involving product developers purchasers marketers salespeople and other professionals in the decisionmaking process. it often brings new perspectives to manufacturing and can inspire new innovations that improve products customer service and more. broad staff representation is also necessary to create more sustainable workplaces.
 production facilities are complex environments where high security requirements govern the design and limit accessibility. but if you can succeed in creating a more visitorfriendly factory this may have an impact on development in several areas.
 in the long term the company also has an impact on surrounding trade industry and society. various forms of associated services and societal functions often develop in tandem with the production unit.
 what are the challenges in the decisionmaking process?
 conflicts of interest can arise when different requirements and values collide. financial values are currently a high priority when final decisions are made. it can be difficult to quantify measures that make the workplace more sustainable that reduce the factorys climate impact or that make it possible to host preschool classes where the future recruitment base is found.
 buying new technology for a factory can also be complicated. in the wake of digitalisation the pace of development is rapid while investment in new equipment must be longterm. achieving an optimal requirements specification that satisfies many values requires broad interdepartmental collaboration and a transparent decisionmaking process.
 but the biggest challenge is probably seeing factory investment as part of a bigger picture. to think not only about product and profitability but to think more innovatively and to value the whole.
 scania is in a process of major organisational change and is talking more and more about new value chains. there is a growing awareness that not all values can be translated into dollars and cents.
 my role at scania is to support colleagues around the world in issues of production development and quality. so i hope to be able to help broaden perspectives as the company invests in new factories.
 its great to see that the company is already taking the impact of digitalisation into account and including sustainability values in the decisionmaking process.
 read anders johanssons thesis challenging traditional manufacturing objectives designing manufacturing systems for product manufacturing and value production
 anders johansson about sicomap
 plc robotics plug  produce and configurable multi agent systems
 modelbased plug amp produce in assembly automation
 from cad to plug amp produce  a generic structure for the integration of standard industrial robots into agents
 webadmin  a faster way to administrate active directory
 humancentric process planningfor plug amp produce  digital threads connecting product design withautomated manufacturing
 customization and flexible manufacturing capacity using a graphical method applied on a configurable multiagent system
 safe collaboration between human and robot
 psop agent generator for flexible manufacturing
 reliability and quality of software engineering in manufacturing industry  a case study
 anders wallman
 andreas de blanche
 ph.d. computer science and engineering
 staff member at division of computer engineering and computer science.
 skilled in high performance computing distributed systems and bitcoin and blockchain technology software development and lecturing. andeas de blanche has a masters degree from the univeristy of gothenburgs bussiness school and  a doctorate ph.d. in computer science and engineering from chalmers university of technology.
 he is mainly teaching courses in computer architecture distributed systems including bitcoin and blockchain technology. he is also a supervisor and examiner for university bachelor and master thesis degree projects.
 computer science computer engineering bitcoin blockchain technology high performance computing coscheduling distributed systems.
 andreas petersson
 staff member at division of electrical engineering.
 andreas received the pedagogical award from university west students
 andreas received pedagogical award from university west students
 andreas de blanche has taught computer engineering at university west for 20 years and has enjoyed it all the time. on friday he received the pedagogical award 2021 from the student union at university west.
 i am very glad to receive this award. if i can help students learn new things and have fun in the meantime im really happy says andreas senior lecturer in computer science and engineering.
 for the past 20 years he has been teaching computer science software technology and distributed systems for students in the computer engineering programme and in contract education for industrial companies. in addition he is one of the key figures behind the universitys unique courses in bitcoin and blockchain which started in 2018.
 i really like teaching but the pandemic has of course meant some challenges for us teachers. there is a big difference between meeting the students on campus and online. but the course in bitcoin and upcoming programmes we design to work well both on distance and on campus.
 the student unions pedagogical award was handed over during university wests academic ceremony on friday 29 october. it was the tenth time a university teacher received the award.
 with this award the student union wants to draw attention to teachers who the students think do an extra good job says anders arkbro vice president student union at university west.
 this year the students have nominated twelve teachers based on criteria such as commitment competence and pedagogical approach. the nominees have been interviewed by our former vice president who compiled the interviews and presented the material for the student unions board. the board has since made the decision on the winner anders explains.
 the student unions motivation for awarding andreas de blanche is
 to a person for his humble style and his great interest in sharing his knowledge with students. this person is driven by seeing a change in students.
 a person with roots in university west who inspires students with his background and practical examples from everyday life and working life. the person keeps curiosity about how things work out high and transforms it into an eagerness to explain and develop this for the students.
 because the teacher is very keen to capture the students interest and attention and has the students perspective in focus  and connects to workintegrated learning in teaching shaped to the students needs both now during the studies but above all in a future working life.
 the recipient of the 2021 pedagogical award is andreas de blanche
 andersson m. kapetanovic s. håkansson a. claesdotterknutsson e. 2024. concussion history associated with adolescent psychological distress but not hazardous gambling a crosssectional study. bmc psychology 12 329.
 boson k. claesdotterknutsson e. gurdal s.  kapetanovic s. 2024. adolescent gaming and parentchild emotional closeness bivariate relationships in a longitudinal perspective. current psychology.
 gurdal s. kapetanovic s. einarsson i. boson k.  claesdotterknutsson e. 2023. adolescents perceptions of a relapse prevention treatment for problematic gaminga qualitative study. healthcare 1117 2366.
 werner m. kapetanovic s. nielsen m. gurdal s. andersson m. j. panican a.  claesdotterknutsson e. 2024. when the relationship is at stake parents perception of the relationship with a child with problematic gaming and their perceived need for support. healthcare 128 851.
 andts the importance of the parentchild relationship for adolescent attitudes and play
 the purpose of the current project is to investigate the role of parentchild relationships for adolescents gambling problems and attitudes to gambling and for the effect of a social intervention developed for young people with gaming problems.
 meet anette ekströmbergström and sandra pennbrant professors of nursing who have various roles within stars eu.
 hi anette and sandra what are your roles within stars eu?
 what different working groups are you both a part of?
 well we belong to several different groups. within the curriculum lab we work to establish a joint internal quality assurance strategy.
 within the sustainable model group we monitor review and develop the longterm strategy of stars eu including the roadmap for implementation.
 the tigs that have already been established are healthy aging energy transition digital transformation circular economy entrepreneurship and innovation living spaces and finally arts and creative industries.
 staff member at division of social work and social pedagogy.
 an earlyresponse policesocial work collaborative intervention  perspectives of young participants
 economic support migration and agency  the experiences of young people in newly arrived families from syria
 consequences of availability of extended pupil welfare interventions
 young peoples experiences of parental unemployment and economic adversity
 a gamebased intervention  a technical tool for social workers to combat adolescent datingviolence
 childrens agency in interprofessional collaboration
 its like youre actually playing as yourself  development and preliminary evaluation of green acres high a serious gamebased primary intervention to combat adolescent dating violence
 work integrated learning from the perspective of internationalization
 learning at work during socialwork education  an example of practice learningopportunities from sweden
 how to gain social pedagogic competencies from work integrated learning
 organizing for agency  rethinking the conditions for childrens participation in service provision
 changing attitudes to dating violence  a game based intervention
 attitudes towards dating violence among young people
 the selfreferral affordances of schoolbased social work support  a case study
 consequences of availability of social work support in a school context  extended pupil welfare interventions and effects on school performance
 consequences of availability of extended pupil welfare interventions  effects on school performance
 childrens agency in interprofessional collaborative meetings in child welfare work
 shifting subordination  colocated interprofessional collaboration betweenteachers and social workers
 intra professional collaboration between social pedagogues and social services case workers around children at risk
 the concept of active citizenship social skills and youth life styles
 scientific workarticles
 a workintegrated educational intervention in health and social care  professionals experiences of joint education
 anh truong thomas winman anette ekströmbergström catrin johansson
 a qualitative evaluation and crosscultural adaptation of the short form of the sense of coherence scale soc13 in nepal
 complementary care to promote mental health
 studying intraprofessional and interprofessional learning processes initiated by an educational intervention applying a qualitative design with multimethod approach  a study protocol
 staffs selfreported frequency and management difficulty of challenging behavior among persons with intellectual disabilities in connection with webbased training
 developing a womancentred inclusive definition of traumatic childbirth experiences
 staffs selfreported frequency and management difficulty of challenging behaviour among persons with intellectual disabilities in connection with webbased training
 job demands job resources and health outcomes among nursing professionals in private and public healthcare sectors in sweden  a prospective study
 support and resources to promote and sustain health among nurses and midwives in the workplace a qualitative study
 the concept importance and values of support during childbearing and breastfeeding  a discourse paper
 effects of the inspirational lecture in combination with ordinary antenatal parental classes as professional support for expectant parents  a pilot study as a randomized controlled trial
 birth as a neuropsychosocial event  an integrative model of maternal experiences and their relation to neurohormonal events during childbirth
 the effect of mechanical massage and mental training on heart rate variability and cortisol in swedish employees  a randomized explorative pilot study
 maternal plasma levels of oxytocin during physiological childbirth  a systematic review with implications for uterine contractions and central actions of oxytocin
 firsttime fathers experience of support from midwives in maternity clinics  an interview study
 developing an educational intervention to support workintegrated learning among professionals in health and social care for individuals with intellectual disabilities
 meaning of wellness in caring science based on rodgerss evolutionary concept analysis
 maternal and newborn plasma oxytocin levels in response to maternal synthetic oxytocin administration during labour birth and postpartum  a systematic review with implications for the function of the oxytocinergic system
 caring for persons with intellectual disabilities and challenging behavior  staff experiences with a webbased training program
 a workintegrated intervention in health and social care  professionals experiences of joint education
 developing a womancentered inclusive definition of traumatic childbirth experiences  a discussion paper.
 facilitators for and barriers to nurses workrelated health  a qualitative study
 nurses and midwives professional support increases with improved attitudes  design and effects of a longitudinal randomized controlled processoriented intervention
 studying intraprofessional and interprofessional learning processes initiated by an educational intervention applying a qualitative design with multimethod approach  a study protocol.
 caring for persons with intellectual disabilities and challenging behavior  staff experiences with a webbased training program
 maternal plasma levels of oxytocin during breastfeeding  a systematic review
 firsttime mothers enjoyment of breastfeeding correlates with duration of breastfeeding sense of coherence and parental couple and child relation  a longitudinal swedish cohort study
 firsttime mothers have a desire to be offered professional breastfeeding support by pediatric nurses  an evaluation of the motherperceivedprofessional support scale
 firsttime fathers experiences of professional support from child health nurses
 my thesis is titled creating and establishing a positive care relationship between nurses patients and relatives. an ethnographic study of encounters at a department of medicine for older people. the thesis takes an ethnographic approach with theoretical foundations in the sociocultural and interaction perspectives.
 i teach various courses within the nursing program and supervise students degree projects at both undergraduate and advanced levels.
 care relationship clinical learning communication ethnographic approach nursing students older patients relatives registered nurses social interaction sociocultural perspective
 systems owner
 staff member at service  it.
 stars european university alliance
 anika pozo hammar latam supply chain advisory
 antagning  admissions office
 batteries in electrical vehicles  start v. 5
 manufacturing and recycling of lithiumion batteries  start v. 11
 postnummer och ort postal code and city
 bifoga ett cv med arbetslivserfarenhet cv with work experience
 telefonnummer phone number
 min arbetsgivare har kännedom om min ansökan my employer is aware of my application
 exf500 anmälan omexamination
 anmälan till forskarkursapplication to phd course
 personnummersocial security number
 vfpf010 start 2024 w. 3645
 vfff010 start 2024 w. 3647
 fomf010 start 2025 w. 423
 staff member at finance.
 manages the accounting for the universitys activities such as
 supplier invoices for the library and the department of engineering science
 customer invoices
 financial support for the department of engineering science
 controller assignments are to
 support the management team in the process for operational planning and follow up based on the annual wheel.
 educate managers within financial area
 be a support in other financial matters.
 informationssystem.
 technology introduction in the health sector through learning and innovationoriented work processes
 special issue guest editorial  perspectives on sustainable learning and organizing part one
 management learning in public healthcare during pandemics
 how to apply and manage critical success factors in healthcare information systems development?
 postformation venture development in the healthcare sector  the roles and contributions of different stakeholders
 resilience in keeping the balance between demand and capacity in the covid19 pandemic a case study at a swedish middlesized hospital.
 guest editorial  learning capabilities for future work practices
 conceptualizing workplace learning in healthcare digital transformation
 nurses experiences of personcentred care planning using videoconferencing.
 anntherese hedqvist ann svensson lena larsson
 nurses experiences of using asthmatuner  an ehealth selfmanagement system for healthcare of patients with asthma
 risk factors when implementing erp systems in small companies
 challenges in implementing digital assistive technology in municipal healthcare
 creating innovations by building demonstrator arenas
 development of an animated video for pre and postoperative learning for osteoarthritis patients
 management challenges for future digitalization of healthcare services
 sustainable innovations in small enterprises for the transformation of the primary healthcare sector
 identifying risk factors in implementing erp systems in small companies
 scaffolding teacher communities for collaboration using wikis within secondary school
 personcentered healthcare in coordinated care planning with video conference  nurses perspective
 anntherese hedqvist ann svensson
 attitudes to ict in a healthcare organisation
 collaborative work in complex problem domains  a case study in thermal spraying
 challenges in using it systems for collaboration in healthcare services
 knowledge management for operations management within health care
 acceptance of video conferencing in healthcare planning in hospitals
 it systems for collaboration in healthcare for frail elderly people
 the teachers perspective on school leadership for ict
 interprofessional learning for teaching  using digital tools
 coping skills of students in synchronous computermediated communication
 the use of information systems in professional healthcare work practices
 a new leadership and its implications on professions
 students use of semiotic structures in synchronous computermediated communication  an interscandinavian study
 belonging to t or lprofession?  about professional and organizational challenges for knowledge management
 an approach for trust and is engagement in professionalorientated work
 attitudes to information technology among healthcare professions 2009
 growth of ecological production in the agricultural sector
 attitudes to information technology in health care professions
 instructionaldesign theories applied on a webbased learning application
 standing together at the helm  how employees experience employeedriven innovation in primary car
 womens experiences of remote video calls with a labour ward midwife during early labour
 learning in living lab collaboration in primary care  a qualitative study
 healthcare professionals learning when implementing a digital artefact identifying patients cognitive impairment
 experiences of using surveillance cameras as a monitoring solution at nursing homes  the eldercare personnels perspectives.
 workplace learning and digital transformation in healthcare  literature review and tentative findings
 leading and organizing workplace learning in healthcare digital transformation  the proposal of a conceptual model
 aspects of expansive learning in the context of healthy ageing  a formative intervention between dental care and municipal healthcare
 peruvian small and mediumsized enterprises in times of crisisor what is happening over time?
 the management of supply chain risks  some initial insights
 operations knowledge management in health care
 competence development for teachers within a digital interprofessional community
 the dark sides of technology  barriers to workintegrated learning
 identifying motives for implementing ehealth by using activity theory
 assessing the business value of electronic ordertopayment cycle
 how to fix how to fix airplanes  why aircraft maintenance is said to be complex and risky
 frail older persons experiences of information and participation in hospital care
 flawed communications  health professionals experience of collaboration in the care of frail elderly patients
 adoption of erp system for operations management in smes
 the value of investments in competence development and crosscultural knowledge sharing
 voluntary disclosure of information on intangibles in corporate annual reports
 conditions for participation within synchronous online collaborative learning
 the role of ict for the growth of small enterprises in ethiopia
 on organization of professions related to is use
 professional knowledge sharing in aircraft maintenance a new complex in dynamics
 knowledge integration in professionoriented work a crosscase analysis
 development of the road carriers cluster in the western region of sweden
 a true and fair view  harmonization of the accounting
 exchange in italy
 during her human resources studies at university west anna collin went on an exchange semester to milan italy to study at the università cattolica del sacro cuore.
 anna describes her experience as an exchange student as enriching. she says that the semester abroad went from feeling like a long vacation to eventually becoming a new everyday life.studying at a university in another country with a different school system has been interesting she says. adapting to a new culture and meeting new people has taught me a lot about myself and others.
 creating memories
 of course the semester abroad included a lot of studying but the best memories anna brings with her home to sweden are from the times spent not studying.
 from milan you can easily reach other cities such as como verona and florence by train. although the best trip was when we rented a car and took a road trip through tuscany together with a group of friends i met here.these are also the times she will miss the most.i will miss the people ive met here. since a lot of us didnt have our families and friends around we did almost everything together which made us really close. i will also miss the excitement about constantly discovering new places and learning from the experiences that come with it. of course also the food the pastapizzadiet did not disappoint anna says.
 it was sometimes challenging
 before leaving sweden anna was aware that there would be a languagebarrier since her italian skills are nonexistent. but she put her faith in the possibility to communicate in english.
 to my surprise not many people know english even people my age she says.
 other than some language difficulties anne also found it challenging to live in a shared apartment  at times.
 sharing a kitchen with 11 people from nationalities all around the world has been a little crowded sometimes. it requires some planning and a lot of patience but it has also resulted in some good stories she says.
 advice to other students
 anna says do it to anyone considering going abroad during their studies. even though theres some hurdles to jump through before departure its worth it according to anna.
 she also has some other tips
 save money so that you can enjoy your new city but also be able to travel around. dont worry some things might seem complicated like choosing courses or finding a place to live but things will work out in the end.
 a mechanical engineers transformative exchange in madrid
 anna edlund a mechanical engineering student at university west describes her transformative exchange experience in madrid at carlos iii universidad madrid. she highlights personal development and cultural insights emphasizing that studying abroad was one of her best decisions ever.
 meet anna edlund who is studying mechanical engineering at university west. anna embarked on an exchange adventure in madrid spain at carlos iii universidad madrid. reflecting on her experience anna shares one of my best decisions was to study abroad. ive developed personally and opened up opportunities to work abroad after my degree.
 adapting to a different academic and cultural landscape anna notes the school and culture are different but ive learned from spains culture and other international students worldwide. her time abroad has been marked by vibrant atmospheres and global connections.spain also brought some surprises such as the realization that it can be pretty cold there and the cultural nuances of mañana mañana and siesta. adjusting to a different dinner schedule and navigating a different school system provided valuable insights.the challenges anna faced while abroad included language barriers and managing multiple englishtaught courses concurrently. as anna left spain to go back to sweden shell miss her newfound international family the diversity of the people and the warmth of spanish weather and culture.
 her advice to aspiring students is short and simple you wont regret it.
 communications officer
 staff member at office of communication and international relations.
 external assignments
 experienced professional with over a decade of financial advisory practice for corporationsstartupspublic administration
 examiner nominated by the public accountants examination board
 corporate finance financial reporting and analysis investment analysis and portfolio management ethics in finance entrepreneurial finance financial institutions and risk management
 corporate finance financial analysis corporate governance investment
 a. jakobsson j. loberg  m. kjörk 2023. retrievalbased learning versus discussion which review practice will better enhance primary school students knowledge of scientific content? international journal of science education. doi10.108009500693.2023.2283906
 rönner ac. jakobsson a. gericke n. 2023. bacteria are not viruses viruses are more malicious young pupils understanding of bacteria and viruses in the aftermath of covid19 bacteria are not viruses viruses are more malicious young pupils understanding of bacteria and viruses in the aftermath of covid19. journal of biological education.doi10.108000219266.2023.2247409
 rönner ac. jakobsson a. gericke n. 2023. cough sneeze pass it on  pupils understanding of infectious diseases in the aftermath of covid19. journal of biological education.
 auffret a et al. 2023. more warmadapted species in soil seed banks than in herb layer plant communities across europe.  journal of ecology111 5 10091020.
 herbertsson l et al. 2021. bees increase seed set of wild plants while the proportion of arable land has a variable effect on pollination in european agricultural landscapes. plant ecology and evolution 154 3 341350.
 plue j. et al. 2020. buffering effects of seed banks on plant community diversity in response to land use and climate. global ecology and biogeography. doi 10.1111geb.13201
 jakobsson a. padrón b.  ågren j. 2015. distancedependent effects of invasive lupinus polyphyllus on pollination and reproductive success of two native herbs. basic and applied ecology 16120127
 ekroos j. jakobsson a. wideen j. herbertsson l. rundlöf m.  smith h. g. 2015. effects of landscape composition and configuration on pollination in a native herb a field experiment. oecologia 179509518.
 jakobsson a.  ågren j. 2014. distance to semi?natural grassland influences seed production of insect pollinated herbs. oecologia 175199208.
 jakobsson a.  padrón b. 2014. do the invasive lupinus polyphyllus increase pollinator visitation to a native herb through effects on pollinator population sizes? oecologia 174217226.
 lazáro a. jakobsson a. totland ø. 2013. how do pollinator visitation rate and seed set relate to species floral traits and community context? oecologia doi 10.1007s0044201326525.
 jakobsson a. padrón b.  traveset a. 2009. competition for pollinators between invasive and native plants  effects of spatial scale of investigation. ecoscience 16138141
 jakobsson a. padrón b.  traveset a. 2007.  pollen transfer from invasive carpobrotus spp. to natives  a study of pollinator behaviour and reproduction success. biological conservation 141136145.
 jakobsson a. eriksson o.  bruun h.h. 2006. local seed rain and seed bank in a speciesrich grassland effects of plant abundance and seed size. canadian journal of botany 84 18701881.
 jakobsson a.  dinnetz p. 2005. local adaptation and the effects of isolation and population size  the semelparous perennial carlina vulgaris as a study case. evolutionary ecology19 449466.
 jakobsson a.  eriksson o. 2003. tradeoffs between dispersal and competitive ability a comparative study of winddispersed asteraceae forbs. evolutionary ecology17 233246
 jakobsson a.  eriksson o. 2002 seed size and frequency patterns of understory plants in swedish deciduous forests. ecoscience9 7478.
 eriksson o  jakobsson a. 2000. recruitment tradeoffs and the evolution of dispersal mechanisms in plants. evolutionary ecology13 411423.
 jakobsson a.  eriksson o. 1999. a comparative study of seed number seed size seedling size and recruitment in grassland plants. oikos88 494502.
 eriksson o.  jakobsson a. 1998. abundance distribution and life histories of grassland plants a comparative study of 82 species. journal of ecology86 922933.
 traveset a  jakobsson a 2007 ecology of plant reproduction mating systems and     pollination. in functional plant ecology. eds f. pugnaire  f. valladares.
 i currently work fulltime for the swedish council for higher education assessing merits for international students applying for studies in sweden.
 the additive manufacturing process is of special interest. when performing additive manufacturing completely new components are produced by melting metal wire using welding technology. layer upon layer of melted wire is deposited until the desired shape is reached.
 i am supervising phdstudents in production technology with special interest in issues regarding welding automation. i have long experience of teaching feedback control and electrical technology in engineering programs.
 welding automation noncontact measurement feedback control measurement systems for welding
 monitoring and control of directed energy deposition using a laser beam
 experimental validation of an inductive probe for narrow gap measurement based on numerical modelling
 investigation of effects from realistic influences on inductive gap measurement
 robust visionbased joint tracking for laser welding of curved closedsquarebutt joints
 detecting beam offsets in laser welding of closedsquarebutt joints by wavelet analysis of an optical process signal
 joint tracking in zero gap laser beam welding using a vision sensor
 automation of a laser welding system for additive manufacturing
 sampleddata hcontrol for timevarying hybrid systems
 low order sampleddata h control
 resistance based iterative learning control of additive manufacturing with wire
 automatic detection of material phase transitions from spectroscopic data
 emissivity compensated spectral pyrometry for varying emissivity metallic measurands
 investigation of path compensation methods for robotic friction stir welding
 height control of laser metalwire deposition based on iterative learning control and 3d scanning
 automation of laser metal deposition for the manufacture of fully dense structures
 model order reduction methods applied to a welding model
 a unified framework for mixed continuousdiscretetime h_infinity control
 analysis and evaluation of a general camera model
 control design for automation of robotized laser metalwire deposition
 automation of a robotised metal deposition system using laser melting of wire
 automatic generation of multivariable sampleddata controllers for jetengines
 accuracy investigation of a vision based system for pose measurements
 simulated feedback control of metal fusion welding
 automation of robotized laser metalwire deposition
 inprocess spectroscopic detection of chromium loss during directed energy deposition of alloy 718
 a study on change point detection methods applied to beam offset detection in laser welding
 adaptive control of the filler wire rate during laser beam welding of squared butt joints with varying gap width
 inprocess monitoring and control of robotized laser beam welding of closed square butt joints
 monitoring of varying joint gap width during laser beam welding by a dual vision and spectroscopic sensing system
 model based feedback control of gas tungsten arc welding  an experimental study
 low order sampled data h control using the delta operator and lmis
 continuous discrete and sampleddata h control  a unified framework
 mixed continuousdiscretetime output feedback h control  a unified approach
 resistance measurements for control of laser metal wire deposition
 emissivity compensated spectral pyrometryalgorithm and sensitivity analysis
 emissivity estimation for high temperature radiation pyrometry on ti6al4v
 a local model for online path corrections in friction stir welding
 automatic inprocess control of laser metalwire deposition based on sensor feedback
 almir heralic annakarin christiansson
 friction stir welding with robot for light vehicle design
 role of fixture forces on distortion in gas tungsten arc welding  an experimental and modelling approach
 camera modelling and calibration  with applications
 offline simulation of advanced stereo vision welding applications
 increased stability in laser metal wire deposition through feedback from optical measurements
 almir heralic annakarin christiansson mattias ottosson bengt lennartson
 sensor and control system for metal deposition using robotised laser welding.
 a new camera model and algorithms for higher accuracy and better convergence in visionbased pose calculations
 a new camera model for higher accuracy pose calculations
 modelling and simulation for feedback control of welding
 simulation for design of automated welding
 freeform fabrication using laser metalwire deposition
 ongoing and finished projects
 staff member at human resources.
 staff member at division of business administration.
 breaking the mold  reinterpreting industrial digital transformation and coworkership
 crafting your career path using the principles of workintegrated learning wil during your phd journey  workshop 20240516 alnarp
 exploring socially sustainable smart manufacturing  building bridges over troubled waters
 industrial phd students spanning the boundaries between academia and practice  a collaboration for organisational learning organisational learning knowledge and capabilities.
 desperately seeking industrial digital strategy  a dynamic capability approach
 libraryfaculty collaboration in the light of a business administration bachelors program  the scientific wave
 artificial and human intelligence through learning  how industry applications need humanintheloop
 in an urban food desert  a study of mobile farmers markets and social entrepreneurship in washington dc
 network collaboration for local and regional development the case of swedish women entrepreneurs
 approaches to inclusive networking in place development  an illustration from six smaller scandinavian cities
 making sense of social media implementation  a longitudinal case study of the technological frames of hotel employees
 canals rivers and lakes as experiencescapes  destination development based on strategic use of inland water
 destination development with focus on strategic use of inland water areas as experiencescapes
 doing good at a nonprofit tourist attraction
 making an effort for free  volunteers roles in destinationbasedstorytelling
 driving forces for sustainable destination development  a nordic study based on maritime culture and inland searegions
 making an effort for free  volunteers roles in destinationbased storytelling
 a tourist attractions members  their motivations relations and roles
 beyond lean production practices and industry 4.0 technologies toward the humancentric industry 5.0
 management toward industry 5.0  a coworkership approach on digital transformation for future innovative manufacturing
 one foot in academia and one in worklife  the case of swedish industrial phd students
 a coworkership approach on digital transformation  towards smart manufacturing
 managers perceptions of industrial digitalization in the early phases of a pandemic  a qualitative study
 industrial phd education  exploring doctoral students acting in the intersection of academia and worklife
 collaboration for learning  industrial phdstudents in the intersection of academia and worklife
 becoming a smart old town  how to manage stakeholder collaboration and cultural heritage
 keeping up the pace of digitalization in small businesses  women entrepreneurs knowledge and use of social media
 inclusive place innovation as a means for local community regeneration
 framing organizational social media  a longitudinal study of a hotel chain
 conceptualizing universitysociety collaboration  a literature review focusing on drivers of collaboration
 linking technological frames to social media implementation  an international study of hotels
 challenges of collaboration in old townscapes
 a nordic perspective on cooperation for sustainable destination and regional development
 exploring nordic ways of tourism cooperation around canals rivers and inland water areas
 destination development through storytelling focused on maritime culture
 members in tourism settings  their motivations behaviours and roles
 doing good  an exploration of members motivations and behaviours in tourism settings
 members as participating supporters and front line cocreators  spatial aspects of member interactions in tourism settings
 first lecturer
 staff member at section for nursing  graduate level.
 qualified analyst
 staff member at vice chancellors office.
 financial support for the department administration
 work close to the management team and support with various decision basis
 produce financial material to support the longterm planning of the department
 coordinate the process for budget planning and followup at the department including all financing sources
 financial administration of externally funded projects on behalf of the department of engineering science
 responsible for internal communication at kir news editor for internal news coordinates the universitys internal news writes internal news and is the editor of the universitys newsletter to all employees communicative support to the universitys managementeditor for the universitys staff portal
 communicative support for the universitys campus developmentcommunicative support for the universitys work with sustainable development quality and work environment
 staff member at division of library and study support.
 for english see below
 sbip informationsteam
 i participate and work for development and execution around various issues around the library room and have a special focus on current tasks regarding practical details and signs. i also buying books and attend the librarys information desk several times a week.
 i am supervisor in the supplemental instruction team which support the supplemental instructors.
 i participate in the following forums
 team library room
 sbip information team
 supplemental instruction team
 annalisa sannino hopes that workintegrated learning can lead to a better world
 annalisa sannino hopes that work integrated learning can lead to a better world
 we asked annalisa what academic background she has that led to the title of professor.
 at university west annalisa closely collaborates with lars svensson kristina johansson maria spante and anette bolin on themes related to chatbased formative interventions in work and communities.
 what at university west makes you appreciate working there?
 what future dreams do you have?
 i hope this collaboration with uw will lead to developments that will place work integrated learning at the core of multidisciplinary international debates on the most acute challenges of our time including conflict resolution climate work and work for counteracting poverty. a better world can be realized and to an extent is already being realized by many collective efforts that often remain invisible or distant from one another. work integrated learning has a very strong potential to contribute to this state of affairs finishes annalisa.
 supplier invoices for university administration department
 eklund a. sterner a. skyvell nilsson m.  larsman p. 2024 the impact of transition programs on wellbeing experiences of work environment and turnover intention among early career hospital nurses. work a journal of prevention assessment and rehabilitation. online ahead of print doi 10.3233wor230537
 eklund a.  skyvell nilsson m. 2024 program coordinators perspectives on implementing a transition program for newly graduated nurses a qualitative interview study. journal of health organization and management 389 143156.
 karlsson s. gyllencreutz l. hylander j.  eklund a. 2023. tactical leaders and collaborative organizations nontechnical skills during major road tunnel incidents  an iterative focus group study. international emergency nursing 101357.
 sterner a. skyvellnilsson m.  eklund a. 2023. the value of simulationbased education in developing preparedness for acute care situations an interview study of new graduate nurses perspectives. nurse education in practice 67 103549.
 eklund a. karlsson s.  gyllencreutz l. 2023. building common knowledge when responding to major road tunnel incidents an interorganisational focus group study. international journal of emergency services 122 145160.
 detlín m. nyman v. eklund a.  skyvell nilsson m. 2022. the experience of new nurses early working life learning in a hospital care context  an interview study. nurse education in practice 65103506.
 sterner a. skyvell nilsson m. jacobsson m.  eklund a. 2022. perceived ability to provide care in acute situations the influence of simulationbased education on new graduate nurses. journal of emergency nursing 14s0099176722001258.
 eklund a. saveman bi.  gyllencreutz l. 2021. situational awareness during a fullscale exercise in an underground mine a qualitative singlecase study of the ambulance incident commander international emergency nursing 54 100950.
 teaching power and social difference  practicing antioppressive education in the university classroom
 placeringsort
 annual fire alarm inspection  today thursday 158
 alarm bells will be tested between 1400  1430 during an annual fire alarm check on campus today 158.during the time the alarm is being tested we do not need to leave the building.
 link to english version of web page available below
 english version
 to application web page in english
 hrspecialist                        hrstrateg
 this page contains information and checklists  in swedish and english  for admitted students
 reserekommendation information in english below
 the exchange mobility is only valid providing no advise against travelling to the mobility destination is listed at the web pages of the ministry of foreign affairs in sweden. it is the responsibility of each accepted student to regularly monitor this state of affairsud avråder  regeringen.seit is important to check that it is still safe to travel to the host country even if there has been no advise against travelling at the time of admission.
 the insurance is not valid in countries where the ministry of foreign affairs in sweden has listed advice against travelling even if the advice only concerns specific areas in the respective country.
 the insurance is not valid if advice against travelling is listed on the day of the departure. in case an advice against travelling will be listed after departure the insurance is valid for a transitional period 30 days so the insured has time to leave the country and to return to sweden.
 the insurance is valid in countries where an advice for nonessential travel has been listed from the ministry of foreign affairs of sweden.
 checklist in english for admitted students
 overseas exchange studies
 experimental investigation of high power laser material processing with particular interest for welding.
 development of hybrid sensing systems mainly based on optical and spectroscopic sensors for realtime monitoring and closed loop control of laser based production processes.
 laser micromachining and micronanostructuring of metals semiconductors and dielectrics based on picofemtosecond laser ablation. the main area of interest are microdrilling and micromilling of metals microjoining of transparent materials laser texturing of metal surfaces to enhance their tribological properties laser synthesis of nanoantomicrobials by laser ablation in liquids ablation with bursts of ultrashort pulses.
 presently supervisor of n.3 physics phd students at the university of bari and n.1 postdoc fellow at the cnrinstitute for photonics and nanotechnologies in bari.
 laser welding plasma optical spectroscopy closed loop control laser ablation laser micronano processes ultrafast laser technology.
 publications by antonio ancona can be found in google scholar.
 multi sensor monitoring  of the wiremelt pool interaction inhotwire directed energy deposition using laser beam
 conduction mode laser welding with beam shaping using a deformable mirror
 hotwire laserdirected energy deposition  process characteristics and benefits of resistive preheating of the feedstock wire
 numerical and experimental investigation of the discrete spot laser hardening of a graphitecoated hypereutectoid steel using a fibre laser
 spectroscopic monitoring of laser blown powder directed energy deposition of alloy 718
 incubation effect in burst mode fslaser ablation of stainless steel samples
 vision and spectroscopic sensing for joint tracing in narrow gap laser butt welding
 beam shaping with a deformable mirror for gap bridging in autogenous laser butt welding
 beam offset detection in laser stake welding of tee joints using machine learning and spectrometer measurements
 effect of shaped laser beam profiles on melt flow dynamics in conduction mode welding
 vision based beam offset detection in laser stake welding of tjoints using a neural network
 incubation during laser ablation with bursts of femtosecond pulses with picosecond delays
 fabrication and assembling of a microfluidic optical stretcher polymeric chip combining femtosecond laser and micro injection molding technologies
 discrete spot laser hardening and remelting with a highbrilliance source for surface structuring of a hypereutectoid steel
 we look forward to receiving your application for an englishtaught programme at university west. here youll find all you need to know about application and admission.
 we follow the documents that is written at universityadmissions.se we require no additional specifik documents besides that. the bachelor degree need to be in the field that is written on the programme page.
 the admission requirements are different for each programme. please check the admission requirements by clicking on the programme you are interested in and then choose admission and application.
 find more information and details on each programme at university west  bachelors and masters programmes
 we follow the documents that is written at  no additional specifik documents besides that. then the bachelor degree need to be in the field that is written on the programme page.
 the english language requirement for all programmes taught in english is the equivalent of english studies at the upper secondary high school level in sweden called english 6 or english b.
 see more about the english language requirement below.
 read more about how to meet the english requirements at university admissions.
 if you have any questions about the admission requirements please send us an email at study@universitywest.se
 application procedure
 the application procedure basically consists of three steps
 apply onlineapplication for programmes with start in autumn opens midoctober. application for programmes with start in spring opens in june.
 pay the application fee if applicable
 here you will find information about dates and deadlines for our masters programmes and bachelors programmes
 see key dates and deadlines.
 read more information about studying in sweden and the application procedure.
 all our programmes that start in the autumn semester are open for application from midoctober until spring.
 here you will find information about dates and deadlines for our masters programmes and bachelors programmes.
 the deadline for receipt of supporting documentation and application fee if applicable is 1 february.
 students applying for a university west scholarship can do that from november to 1 february.
 application for programmes starting in january spring semester will open in june. the programme starts in the spring semester of the following year.
 application fee
 if your citizenship is in a country outside of the eueea or switzerland you are required to pay an application fee. the application fee is sek 900 swedish kronor.
 not sure if you need to pay the application fee? get more details on who pays the fee.
 here you will find an overview of frequently asked questions related to admission and application.
 eng application dates and links
 application dates and links
 below you find deadlines and links to online forms for application
 application for exchange studies starting the same academic year
 10 septemberexchange studies  second application round for exchange semetser spring 2025 partneruniversities within euees erasmus programme and outside overseas.you can apply for studies starting upcoming spring semester only.link to online application will be published at  on 10th april
 eramsus internshipapplication is to be submitted online but please contac us at international@hv.se if you want to apply and we will then send you information and link for application.
 application for exchange studies starting the following academic year
 1 december deadline for application to the isep programmeapplication opens 1 novemberlink to online application isep will be published here 1 november 2024
 15 februaryexchange studies  last date for application to partner universities within euees erasmus programme and outside overseas.you can apply for studies starting upcoming autumn semester andor spring semester.link to online application will be published here 15 december 2024
 15 marslate applicaiton round for exchanges studies  last date for late application to partner universities within euees erasmus programme och utanför overseas.you can apply for studies starting upcoming autumn semester andor spring semesterlink to late application will be published on  how to apply erasmus and overseas
 28 februarilast date of application for placement abroad through iaeste directly to iaeste
 refund of tuition fee
 application for refund of tuition fee
 if the application is approved the refund will be made to the same bank account where the payment for tution fee came from in the first place.
 online form
 your first name
 your last namefamily name
 uw student iddate of birth
 programme at university west
 reason for claiming tuition fee refund
 migration agency decision please submit a scanned copy of migration agency decision
 other please specify below
 other please specify
 relevant documents to be uploaded note pdf only
 tuition fee payment receipt
 other relevant documents note pdf only
 exchange accommodation application form
 application for accommodation
 international students can apply for student accommodation via housing agencies eidar and hammar nordic.
 please fill out the information below and submit your accommodation application.
 first name
 last name  family name
 date of birth
 other
 nationality
 home university
 phone number
 are you willing to share a bedroom with another student if needed? if you choose yes you have a higher chance of sleeping in the same room as another student.
 other information special request
 submit application
 on this page you submit your application for accommodation at eidar housing lantmannavägen 1214 in trollhättan.
 please follow the instructions below to submit you application.
 exchange students from university west partner universities apply online. to be able to apply you need to be nominated for exchange studies by your home university.
 1. university west receives a nomination by your home university all exchange students must be nominated by their home university coordinator for exchange studies.
 2. university west sends information to nominated students on how to applyonce we have received your nomination we will send you information with a link for your application.
 3. submit application formthe link will take you directly to the application form for incoming exchange studies at university west. fill out the form and send it.please note that although you will be prompted to choose a subject area of your studies at university west through a dropdown list you will still be able to select courses from any department later on in the process.
 4. create account in mobilityonlinewe use a system called mobilityonline for incoming student application and documentation. once you have submitted your application form you will receive an email with instructions on how to creat your account in moblityonline.
 5. prepare and upload relevant documentsonce you have created your account you will need to upload a transcript of records. this needs to be translated into english if it is issued in another language originally.
 6. submit your applicationonce you have uploaded the documentation confirm the submission in your mobilityonline account.
 please note that we do not limit the number of participants for our courses so providing you are eligible for the course you have applied for  you will get a seat in the class.
 application opens 1 septemberdeadline for application 15 april
 transcript of records
 an official record showing creditscourses obtained in previous years of study. if the record is not in english a translation of this into english must be submitted also.
 english requirements
 at university west we do not require an english language test for exchange students. however to be able to follow the lectures and participate in seminars and groupworks a good knowledge of english is necessary. according to eu recommendations the level b1 is advisable. read more at the europass webpage.
 if you have already done a toefl or ielts test the following results are what we recommend to have to study here on exchange
 ielts an overall mark of 6.5 and no section below 5.5
 toefl score of 4. scale 16 in written test and a total score of 575 paperbased.                       score of 20 scale 030 in written test and a total score of 90 internetbased.
 mor information on course selection
 applied project management fulltime campus tpl100
 project management is a large field of study that cannot be fully explored in just one course. in this overview course we will at a basic level review project management from idea and initiation to completion and impact. the course consists of a short introduction to projects as a form of working and then it dives into the different parts of a project i.e. prestudy planning execution along with closure and impact realization. the starting point for the course is to facilitate students transition from study to working life since projects are common ways of working. theoretical lectures are combined with creative creations of your own projects. the course can also form part of a 30 credits course package together with ais100 work integrated societal studies 15 he credits.
 along the way you will learn key concepts models and methods relevant to projects within the public sector and nonprofit organizations. you will also learn and experience the importance of group dynamics and project organization for project implementation as well as reflect upon processes for knowledge transfer learning and communication related to projects. the course ends with an oral presentation of your own project.
 applied statistics  collecting and summarizing data fulltime campus tss100
 applied statistics  collecting and summarizing data 7.5 hp
 statistics is about collecting summarizing and analyzing data for getting better understanding and insights about the world we are living in.
 suppose that we want to study peoples attitudes toward organic groceries. who should we ask? how could we choose a sample of individuals? should we use interviews facetoface a questionnaire distributed online or maybe do observations on location in a store? naturally reliable and valid ways of sampling and phrasing questions are essential for the quality of the statistics produced. the next thrilling challenge once the data is collected is to summarize the data. adequate choices of statistical figures graphs and tables could confirm expected patterns identify new exciting ones and generates new ideas that no one have thought about before. finally it is time to draw conclusions. is attitude related to educational level? is there a difference between city hipsters and people living in rural areas?
 is statistics fun and interesting? yes
 you also need mathematics 3b or mathematics 3c
 apply to lina funding 2022
 we welcome lina member to apply for lina funding 2022
 to apply for any of the calls you need to have an approval from your department manager
 could be applied for continuously during 2022. this call includes activities such as conference expenses language check translation publications cost professional development
 an application should include the following
 clear argumentation of the suggested activities meets the evaluation criterias including its relevance for ail
 short activity plan including time plan and budget
 target group for the activities suggested
 expected results
 the application will be evaluated based on the following criterias
 viability in relation to the design time and resources described in the application
 relevance in relation to the aim and intentions of the call
 expected results both in terms of reach and output
 note that
 the conference must use the peer review process for submitted contributions
 the submission must result in a conference publication conference proceedings or equivalent
 the conference publication must be highly relevant with regard to the lina environments knowledge interests
 the scientific value of the conference publication is set in relation to the costs of the trip and the environmental impact of the trip carbon footprint
 when applying for support for language review a cost proposal must be attached to the application.
 an application that is granted lina funding means that the applicant undertakes to in collaboration with linas management arrange a seminar on their own conference publication and other highlights and impressions from the conference.
 deadline to submit from 20th of october 15th of november 2021
 project members including short cv
 dissemination plan both scientific and in relation to the filed
 expected results and scientific contribution
 activities designed to strengthen and develop the activity theory hub at university west
 deadline to submit from 20th of october 15th of november
 students with disabilities
 applying for support
 how to apply
 you must make a request by filling in a form in a system called nais in order to receive special pedagogical support. you need to attach a certificate confirming a permanent disability.
 apply here
 after your application
 once your application is received you will be contacted by the coordinator for students with disabilities to book a personal meeting for a mapping interview. after the meeting the coordinator will summarize the decision and recommendations on support in a written notice.
 you can show your certificat on support to your study counsellors teachers examiners and others who need to be informed.
 if your need for support changes during your time of study you have to contact the coordinator for students with disabilities for a new mapping interview and possible revision of the certificate.
 coordinator for disability study support                        studiehandledare academic study coach
 thomas winman
 one of university wests primary longterm goals is to support sustainable development in all activities and education. the school of business economics and it which delivers your programme has many years of expertise in a number of areas that are closely related to sustainable development including
 sustainable community building
 citizenship and democracy studies
 macroeconomics and microeconomics
 leadership studies
 international focus
 work integrated learning
 work integrated learning runs through the entire programme. you will simultaneously study and engage in activities such as data collection optional internship etc. while facing socalled wicked problems complex problems that require more than one theoretical perspective to solve. reflection and collaborative learning with a constant interplay between theoretical modelsperspectives and practical applications structure your course. the programme is multidisciplinary and includes study in organisational development sustainability political science law environmental philosophy and more. workintegrated learning forms the foundation of your studies with special focus on sustainable development.
 the programme prepares you to
 reflect on how knowledge is created learned and translated into practical action within and between activities society and the state
 understand sustainable development the common global goals and their complexity
 evaluate these goals and their relevance to specific situations
 map out how these goals can be achieved organisationally through cooperation within and between organisations or groups
 to develop factbased and critical perspectives of sustainable development
 to discuss normative and moral values around sustainability
 how theoretical knowledge is translated into practical results
 key ideas around organisational impact knowledge development and change management
 distinctive features of sustainability and sustainability competence
 important competencies and strategies leading towards sustainable development
 through systematic reflection on the relationship between facts and norms practical and theoretical knowledge you will gain insight into how organisations and groups can take a resultsbased approach to achieve sustainable development.
 further education
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the broader fields of wil and sustainable development. after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad.
 you will have advanced skills in seeing the possibilities
 dean of the school of business economics and it
 about this programme
 this programme is particularly useful for politicaleconomic oriented professions in public administration nonprofits and private corporations in sweden as well as internationally.
 the programme is given in a campushybrid form. students can enrol and study the programme on campus at university west or at one of the educational partners connected to the programme located at västervik campus uwc campus and cut campus. the programme is not given online.
 in this fully englishtaught programme students and staff come from a wealth of different cultures and regions around the world creating a rich learning environment and student life.
 university west is the leading university for work integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 20 years ago and continues to lead the field today. wil is the practice of moving from academic and theoretical learning to realworld applications within the duration of your programme.
 the masters degree enables you to apply for phd programmes within the subject of political science or related fields in sweden or internationally. university west is the only higher education institution worldwide to offer a unique phd programme in work integrated learning with specialisation in different fields. the master in work integrated political studies is the natural gateway to qualify to apply for phd studies within wil at university west.
 i knew it would prepare me for a job
 student from the united states
 this programme combines theoretical knowledge with relevant skills.
 professor per assmo
 work integrated learning wil is a unique multidisciplinary field integrating academic and practical knowledge and learning. this 15 credits course module is an introduction to wil offering an introduction to wil as a subject form method and applied to realworld challenges. the course can also form part of a 30 credits course package together with tpl100 applied project management 15 he credits.
 the course provides new perspectives of how knowledge production combined with learning and experiences influence societal change through applied studies of societal challenges. the course is relevant for students from all programmes providing unique knowledge skills and experiences relevant for your future working life.
 offert och anbud
 ort
 workintegrated learning is an interdisciplinary subject primarily related to social sciences and the humanities where problems are focused on the relationship between working life and learning.
 working life is defined broadly and also includes other forms than traditional paid work. the term learning is understood in a broad sense and includes change and socialization processes linked to knowledge and competence.
 the blog wilreflections
 our four thematic areas
 industrial workintegrated learning
 professionals learning in working life
 student learning in higher education
 more about wil
 centre for activity theory
 a global node for activity theory material on wil
 to the centre for activity theory
 wil reflections
 to the blog
 wace regional office
 we are the regional office for wace in europe
 read more about the regional office
 contact to the management
 professor                        professor in workintegrated learning
 vision objectives and strategies
 areas of strength work integrated learning and production technology
 university wests board has decided to develop the universitys two areas of strength work integrated learning wil and production technology into complete academic environments. the two environments were set up to formally start january 1 2023. here we will follow the journey in the coming joint building of the environments.
 why do we want to develop two complete academic environments?
 ulrika lundh snis is since spring 2022 responsible for overall coordinating the universitys work with the continued development of two complete academic environments. she is also acting operations manager for the wil environment and joel andersson is acting operations manager for production technology.read more about their roles
 two areas of strength production technology and work integrated learning wil
 what is a complete academic environment?
 has a stable supply of competence that ensures the continuation of the environment even if core people leave their position
 has secured financial backing meaning that the environment has several sources of funding and can live on despite unavoidable variations in the external funding.
 has a wellestablished coproduction with both industry and higher education institutions.
 impact targets and strategies
 both environments have drawn up joint strategies and overarching impact goals that form part of the universitys objectives and strategic roadmap.
 the vicechancellor has decided the following targets and strategies for the complete academic environment as a whole.
 the environments maintain an internationally recognised nationally leading and regionally driving position
 the environments operate regionally nationally and internationally to find solutions that can be transferred to corresponding global challenges.
 the internationalisation work of the environments is characterised by frequently acting as an international host and by partnerships that create greater diversity and quality.
 the environment is clearly integrated vertically and horizontally
 the environments activities are organised so as to support sustainable and flexible learning environments.
 the environments are characterised by a work integrated learning profile
 workintegrated learning is established as a knowledge approach and pedagogical method throughout by means of workintegrated learning accredited training programmes.
 the environments create structured meeting places for dialogue and reflection on different forms of knowledge to build good relations with a wide range of societal actors to achieve collaborative learning.
 acting operations manager for the wil environment  and for production technology
 ark  for a healthy university
 instead of working with a traditional employee survey every two years university west works with ark. ark is a holistic model with a healthpromoting approach to mapping and developing the social and organizational work environment in the higher education sector.
 about ark
 ark is a model for work environment development developed in collaboration between the four largest norwegian universities and with the support of the norwegian council for higher education.  university west was the first university in sweden to introduce the ark concept. the university of gothenburg has been working with ark since 2020 and södertörn university introduced ark in 2023. in norway 19 higher education institutions work with ark. ark is managed by ntnu norwegian university of science and technology in trondheim.
 the model differs in that it is not a survey tool but rather a development tool. as an employee you have a duty to participate and the survey provides an opportunity for you to influence your working conditions.
 the purpose of ark is to generate a basis for development work on work environment within individual higher education institutions. the model places greater emphasis on how the workplaces employees in collective processes have interpreted results and prioritized areas of action than on quantitative mapping results themselves. the process around ark is designed around activities and institutional arrangements that will support employee involvement and the work of translating results into work environment improvement measures.
 the higher education institutions that use ark undertake to
 anchor and seek support for the use of ark in the joint work environment organization i.e. among the safety committee and safety representatives.
 implement all phases of the ark process survey followup meetings action development implementation of measures and evaluation.
 ark is executed in five phases survey mapping meetings action development implementation and evaluation.
 in september 2023 work environment surveys will be sent out by email to employees at university west. the ark survey covers key psychosocial work environment factors and working conditions in the higher education sector. however there are aspects regarding equal terms regulated in the swedish discrimination act missing in ark which is why the ark survey at the university is coordinated with a separate survey about equal opportunities. the two questionnaires are sent from different systems but have the same response time and are simultaneously processed in the followup meetings development of action plans implementation and evaluation.
 the response period is three weeks and ark performance reports are sent back to the unit after another three weeks. the results of the equal terms survey are reported per department and not per unit.
 the performance report is in powerpoint format and designed to be used directly for presentation. the results are presented in bar charts and a spindle summary chart.
 the workplaces ark results are reported in comparison with results for other levels within the organization and in comparison with the university and higher education sector in general.
 n.b. the survey responses are not the results. the responses should be seen as a base for reflection dialogue and continued work.
 content of the surveys
 the survey kiwest  knowledge intensive work environment survey target used in ark has been developed in collaboration between the participating universities. decisions on changes to the survey are made by the ark steering group.
 in essence the ark survey captures what is usually included in the concept of psychosocial work environment and such organizational and social conditions as are formulated in the swedish work environment authoritys regulations on organizational and social work environment afs 20154. the survey is designed to be used in systematic work environment management and is based on how certain working conditions covary with negative experiences stressill health and positive experiences wellbeing and job satisfaction.
 questions aimed at estimating the frequency of for example sexual harassment other types of harassment or discrimination are not included in the ark survey. university west has chosen to coordinate ark with a separate survey on equal opportunities. the results from ark and equal opportunities are worked on at the same time and in the same way with the only difference that the questions are asked and answered in different systems.
 followup meetings
 based on the results of the surveys each workplace organizes followup meetings at which all employees are invited to participate. the meetings should be a broad meeting place for reflection and discussion about the work environment and equal opportunities in the workplace.
 based on how employees and managers have interpreted and evaluated the results of the surveys together and based on their common picture of which working conditions need to be safeguarded and developed employees participate in developing and implementing work environment improvement measures and initiatives. the measures developed must be realistic concrete anchored and possible to implement within the framework of ones own activities. more general issues and measures are passed on to departmental or universitywide level. the actions need to be documented in an action plan.
 the workplace manager is responsible for ensuring that actions are decided and implemented appropriately and for evaluating the implementation. the manager is also responsible for continuously informing employees about what measures are being taken and how the work is progressing.
 after about six months a local evaluation is made. the ark and equal opportunities process will then continue to be carried out at twoyear intervals.
 the five phases of the work with ark and equal opportunities are linked to the practice of systematic work environment management which is regulated in swedish work environment legislation and in the discrimination act.
 information will be treated confidentially. it is not possible for anyone to identify individuals from the responses in the two surveys.
 the ark intervention programme  ntnu
 on autumn arrival day we welcome all our new international students. this is when keys and contracts for student housing can be pickedup.
 arrival day will be scheduled for august 27th.
 if you have received accommodation with the university you can pick up your keys pillow and blanket in i109 between 8002000.
 important if you arrive after 1700 to the university please call this number 46701039859 either whatsapp or normally to be let in for your keys. if you need wifi for this please connect to hvguest wifi.
 please submit your arrival day information university west  arrival form hv.se
 if you arrive on arrival day
 arriving at the airport or central station in gothenburg
 on arrival day international student representatives will welcome you at gothenburg landvetter airport  and gothenburg central station as well trollhättan station and guide your further to trollhättan and your accommodation. student representatives will leave from trollhättan station at 2000.
 arriving on your own
 if you arrive in trollhättan on your own on arrival day and have received accommodation through the university you can pick up keys and contract for your student accommodation in room i109 at university west between 08002000.
 arriving outside opening hours
 if you arrive in trollhättan outside opening hours on arrival day you have to arrange your own accommodation hotelhostel.
 here is a list of some of the hostels and hotels in trollhättanhotel trollhättanhotell bele
 you can pick up keys and contract for your student accommodation the next day at our accomodation booth in the university.
 if you arrive before arrival day
 if you arrive in trollhättan before arrival day you have to arrange your own accommodation hotelhostel.
 here is a list of some of the hostels and hotels in trollhättanhotel trollhattanhotell bele
 on arrival day you can pick up keys and contract for your student accommodation in i109 at university west between 8002000.
 if you arrive after arrival day
 if you arrive after arrival day you can pick up keys and contract for your student accommodation in the servicecenter at university west during opening hours.
 opening hours for servicecenter
 if you arrive in trollhättan between the times 16302000 or on the weekends and have received accommodation from the university we will pair you with a student representative for key handover. please email us at international@hv.se in advance if this is the case.
 getting from servicecenter to student accommodation
 bus connections from servicecenter to student accommodation
 tickets for the buses can be paid by card directly on the bus no cash accepted but you can also buy a bus card which you can charge with cash to make the journeys a bit cheaper or get to cover a certain period or area at a fixed cost. you buy these at any shop with the västtrafik logo but most common ones are hemmakväll at the main town square in trollhättan or at the train station tidpunkten.
 accommodation at magnetiten  bus 61 towards näl
 you can find bus times and more information on the website of västtrafik.
 to be able to plan the arrival of new students we would like to receive information about your arrival so please fill in the form below.
 family name
 cell phone number  where we can reach you during your travel
 i will arrive by
 boat
 other please specify below under other information
 flighttrainbus number
 arriving at
 university west
 gothenburg central station
 landvetter airport gothenburg
 time of arrival
 other informarion
 if you are travelling together with other students please specify names
 article about amir parsian sandvik coromant
 amir was hired to participate in the development of a new generation of indexable insert drills which turned out to be a very successful project. among other things he has contributed valuable knowledge through his work in modelling and analysing measurement data says martin.
 amir first did his masters dissertation at sandvik coromant as part of his earlier studies at blekinge institute of technology.
 i like to explore issues of relevance for industry so when sandvik advertised for an externally employed doctoral student it was a natural step for me says amir.
 one advantage is the rapid feedback from customers on what works and what does not. i have also gained insight into the economic aspects of product development.
 amir is pleased to have been involved in the development of a new more advanced drilling tool. today he works on new projects in the companys rd department.
 i benefit greatly from the knowledge gained through my doctoral studies. my work primarily involves analysing measurement data to better understand what happens in manufacturing processes. as industry digitalises the need for this type of knowledge is growing. the more digitalised production processes become the greater need for data analysis.
 article about ana bonilla gkn aerospace
 when ana started her doctoral studies in 2013 she was already employed by the company.
 my motivation has been to contribute to streamlining cutting processes. we showed that this can both save time and resources and create improved products says ana now rd team and project leader in automation and composite technologies at gkn aerospace.
 today ana leads the companys development work on automating the use of cutting tools in production a complex and wideranging effort that will facilitate improvements to both production flows and the work environment of operators.
 article about erik åstrand volvo ce
 the challenge for erik åstrand an externally employed doctoral student was to develop and improve the welding technology used in manufacturing volvo ces construction machinery. by optimising welding quality machines can be made lighter stronger and more durable. the new welding standard that erik developed has both improved our products and streamlined the production process says andreas ulvagården production technical manager at volvo ces factory in braås.
 erik åstrands cuttingedge expertise in welding is used among other things in volvo ces production of articulated haulers. photo volvo ce
 the requirements for strong reliable and durable welds are extremely strict for articulated haulers wheel loaders and other construction machinery used for heavy loads. volvo ce in braås invests heavily in product and production development.
 we gave erik åstrand the opportunity to work with us as an externally employed doctoral student to develop cuttingedge competence in welding. we consider this a longterm and important investment in strengthening our companys competitiveness says andreas ulvagården who served as åstrands supervisor at volvo ce.
 erik had already been employed at volvo ces manufacturing engineering department a few years prior to his being offered the placement as an externally employed doctoral student.
 eriks work resulted in the introduction of a new welding standard for the company. welding is complicated and requirements on producibility customer demands product lifespan financial aspects and more must all be considered and met to achieve the best solution.
 today erik is the companys global welding specialist. he runs development projects together with colleagues both in braås and at production units in other countries.
 artificial and human intelligence through learning ahil why industry applications need humanintheloop
 the aim of the project was defined together with industry partners gkn aerospace and siemens energy ab reading as follows to understand how industrial digitalization can approach human and artificial intelligence through learning for a future digitalized manufacturing. companies tend to focus on technological improvements in working processes and activities paying less attention to humancentric aspects. interdisciplinary project results are bridging the areas of industrial workintegrated learning and production technology contributing a deeper understanding of how industrial digitalization can approach human and artificial intelligence for learning primarily related to machine learning production flow simulations and interactive user apps.
 fundamental lessons learned from the project are conceptualised into the following best practices
 realizing the need for a more humancentric approach navigating industrial digitalization could reframe industrial digitalization to an incremental change rather than radical and threatening.
 the nexus between human and technology cannot be dismissed when deciding whether to digitalize or not.
 highlevel human input e.g. common sense critical thinking tacit knowledge experienced judgement creativity etc. is recognized as necessary leading industry 4.0 into industry 5.0.
 taking responsibility for industrial digitalization is challenging and the importance of an adaptive organizational culture and a focus on learning and competence are crucial.
 to enhance learning and empower the employees and the organization the arrangements of the sociotechnical capabilities for support in decisionmaking can take various forms in terms of humanintheloop processes.
 contemporary manufacturing companies are navigating industrial digitalization anticipating increased production efficiency and competitiveness in a volatile environment. in the eras of industry 4.0 and industry 5.0 the manufacturing industry cannot rely solely on technology but must also address human and organizational aspects in a sustainable manner.
 machine learning
 the focus of this work package has been on how new disruptive systems built on the industrial internet of things iot and sensorbased technologies measure machine status and systems status. general results show a need to further study the representation and augmentation of data and handle the complexity of realtime data with work practice in heterogeneous it infrastructures on the shop floor. read more
 linnéa carlsson phd student in informatics with a specialization in workintegrated learning has studied the understanding of the underlying aspects of organizational capabilities in manufacturing organizational contexts within the strategic work of implementing digital technologies. findings indicate that managers are desperately seeking an orientation toward industrial digitalization. strategy formulation remains a disparate action in a closed area within an organizations formal and informal structures. there is a lack of organizational enablers to face industrial digitalization within the following domains organizing and maintaining an adaptive culture learning and competence. read more
 coproduction  learning seminars
 a webinar entitled change and leadership in datadriven production  development of copilot was arranged jointly by ptc kunskap and innovatum 13 december 2022. amanda dalstam and jon eklöf from gkn aerospace presented the journey to develop lead and introduce the copilot platform. monika hattinger who has studied the copilot project states that content datadriven production affects the entire organization and creates changes at all levels that need to be further studied. read more
 coproduction  student thesis works
 seven student thesis works at bachelors and masters levels were completed during the ahil project based on a close collaboration and coproduction with industry partners.  the student thesis works covered different areas such as industrial engineering informatics leadership and production logistics with simulation and machine learning. read more
 internal and external presentationsseminars
 1. tillverka i trä wood manufacturing topic production flow simulation 25th of june 2020 directed towards industrial participants tillverka i trä.
 2. primus webinar 12 nov 2020 the interspace between artificial and human systems  about intelligence and learning in sociotechnical practice.
 3. vilär 34 dec 2020 artificial and human intelligence through learning how industry applications need humanintheloop
 5.  ahil project meeting presentation of students exam works 2021 8 june 2021
 6. iacis a conference of the international association for computer information systems 2425 june 2021 taking care of digital initiatives managers approaching industrial digitalization.
 7. american conferences on information systems august 913 2021 realtime analytics through industrial internet of things lessons learned from datadriven industry.
 11. 10th swedish production symposium april 26th  29th 2022 skövde applying digital twin technology with seamless transfer an automation line case study.
 12. swedsoft webinar serie software inspiration for professionals 10 maj 2022 artificial and human intelligence through learning why industry 4.0 needs a humancentric perspective.
 13. faim 2022 flexible automation and intelligent manufacturing international conference 1923 june 2022 detroit to digitalize or not? navigating and merging human and technology perspectives in production planning and control.
 14. iacis conference europe a conference of the international association for computer information systems 2324 june 2022 warsaw poland digital  a coworkership approach on digital transformation  towards smart manufacturing.
 15. cirp conference on manufacturing systems 29 june 1 july 2022 lugano switzerland. conceptual framework of scheduling applying discrete event simulation as an environment for deep reinforcement learning.
 16. nff nordic academy of management conference 2223 aug 2022 what leaders require to deploy ai in manufacturing companies an interdisciplinary and mixed methods approach.
 the ahil project has contributed interdisciplinary results bridging the areas of industrial workintegrated learning and production technology for a deeper understanding of how industrial digitalization can approach human and artificial intelligence for learning primarily related to machine learning production flow simulations and interactive user apps.
 companies tend to focus on technological improvements in working processes and activities paying less attention to humancentric aspects. contemporary manufacturing companies are navigating industrial digitalization anticipating increased production efficiency and competitiveness in a volatile environment. in the eras of industry 4.0 and industry 5.0 the manufacturing industry cannot rely solely on technology but must also address human and organizational aspects in a sustainable manner.
 peerreviewed journals
 1. eriksson k.  hendberg t. 2021 a case study initiating discrete event simulation as a tool for decision making in i4.0 manufacturing. in jayawickrama u. delias p. escobar m.t. papathanasiou j. eds decision support systems xi decision support systems analytics and technologies in response to global crisis management. icdsst 2021. lecture notes in business information processing vol. 414 pp. 8496 springer cham.
 2. carlsson l. hattinger m. olsson a.k.  lundh snis u. 2021. desperately seeking industrial digital strategy a dynamic capability approach. international journal of information systems and change management. 124 345364.
 3. carlsson l. olsson a.k.  eriksson k. 2022. taking responsibility for industrial digitalization navigating organizational challenges. sustainability 14 866
 4. eriksson k. alsaleh a. behzad far s.  stjern d. 2022. applying digital twin technology with seamless transfer an automation line case study. in proceedings of the 10th swedish production symposium april 26th  29th skövde sweden advances in transdisciplinary engineering issn 2352751x vol. 21 pp. 461472
 5. eriksson k. ramasamy s. zhang x. wang z.  danielsson f. 2022. conceptual framework scheduling applying discrete event simulation as an environment for deep reinforcement learning. procedia cirp in proceedings of the 55th cirp conference on manufacturing systems june 29th  july 1st lugano switzerland issn 22128271 eissn 22128271 vol. 107 pp. 955960
 6. eriksson k.m. carlsson l.  olsson a.k. 2022. to digitalize or not? navigating and merging human and technology perspectives in production planning and control. the international journal of advanced manufacturing technology
 7. carlsson l 2023. strategizing organizational capabilities for industrial digitalization  exploring managers technological frames. journal of manufacturing technology management. accepted for publication.
 no.1 is coauthored with industry partner.
 peerreviewed conference papers
 1. lundh snis u. de blanche a. eriksson k.m. hattinger m. olsson a.k. carlsson l.  belenki s. 2020. artificial and human intelligence through learning how industry applications need humanintheloop in ed kristina johansson vilär. 34 december 2020 university west trollhättan. högskolan väst. pp. 2426
 2. hattinger m. lundh snis u.  islind a. s. 2021. realtime analytics through industrial internet of things lessons learned from datadriven industry proceedings of amcis 2021 american conferences on information systems august 913 2021 in canada virtual conference.
 4. carlsson l. olsson a.k.  lundh snis u. 2021. taking care of digital initiatives managers approaching industrial digitalization at a conference of the international association for computer information systems iacis virtual conference europe 2021 june 24  25 2021 pp.2224.
 5. eriksson k. carlsson l.  olsson a.k. 2022. to digitalize or not? navigating and merging human and technology perspectives in production planning and control faim 2022 flexible automation and intelligent manufacturing international conference june 1923 2022 detroit us.
 6. olsson a.k. erikson k.  carlsson l. 2022. a coworkership approach on digital transformation  towards smart manufacturing iacis conference europe a conference of the international association for computer information systems 2324 june 2022 digital warsaw poland p. 1314
 9. eriksson k.m. carlsson l.  olsson a.k. 2023 exploring socially sustainable smart manufacturing  building bridges over troubled waterssubmitted and accepted for presentation at faim 2023 flexible automation and intelligent manufacturing international conference faim june 1822 2023 porto portugal.
 10. carlsson l. 2023. does the humancentric perspective matter? a case study on microfoundations of the transforming capability in the context of industrial digitalization submitted to iacis europe 2023 a conference of the international association for computer information systems june 2024 2023 blagoevgrad bulgaria.
 paper no. 7 is coauthored with industry partner.
 student thesis works
 2. saxin d. 2021. the industry 4.0 revolution and how the rise of machines have changed it departments. master thesis 15 hp informatics university west.
 3. nyberg e. 2021. modelling of production flow at siemens energy digital twin with a view towards real time data implementation. master thesis 30hp master programme in robotics university west
 5. hansson n. 2021. modelling of production flow at siemens energy digital twin with plans toward statistical process control. master thesis 30hp master programme in robotics university west
 6. moskalenko v. 2022. discrete event simulation of production flow at siemens energy  with focus on decision support system for statistical process control considering ai master thesis 30hp master programme in robotics university west
 patients description of onset stroke symptoms  oral presentations. esoc 2023 abstract book
 decisionmaking in seeking emergency care for stroke symptoms
 oral health plays second fiddle in palliative care an interview study with registered nurses in home healthcare
 selfrated health over the first five years after stroke
 to attend or not  the reasoning behind nursing students attendance at lectures  a qualitative study
 nursing students attitudes toward care of dying patients  a pre and postpalliative course study
 communication the key in creating dignified encounters in unexpected sudden death  with stroke as example
 communication as a key in creating dignified encounters in unexpected sudden death by stroke
 reasoning about truthtelling in endoflife care of patients with acute stroke
 symptoms at stroke onset as described by patients a qualitative study
 marketing of educational programs  a study of swedish universities through presented images
 integrity at end of life in the intensive care unit  a qualitative study of nurses views.
 dignity at stake  caring for persons with impaired autonomy
 changes in functional outcome over five years after stroke
 creating dignified encounters in unexpected sudden death by stroke  communication as the key
 nursing students attendance at learning activities in relation to attainment and passing courses  a prospective quantitative study
 strategies for handling ethical problems in end of life care  obstacles and possibilities
 åsa roxberg rn rnt phd in caring science. she holds the position of professor since 1st january 2018 halmstad university but is now affiliated as professor att university west trollhättan.
 since 2008 she has also held the postion of første amanuensis ass. professor at vid university college in bergen and since 2019 as professor at the same university retired since 2023. åsa roxberg has also been assistant professor at mälardalen university.
 her portfolio includes supervision for master degree two students have concluded their master as well as being examinator for three international master thesis. one of her phd student completed her doctoral theis in december 2012 and the norweigan phd student completed her doctoral thesis at bergen university 2015 and recently halmstad university principal supervisor 2018. åsa roxberg has also been principal supervisor for a doctoral student at linneus university who defended his thesis 25th may 2018. further roxberg supervised a doctoral student at mälardalen university who completed her doctoral theis in 2017. roxberg has been a member of the internal reviewer group for doctoral thesis manuscripts on four occasions as well as on four occasions for licentiate degree manuscripts all at school of health and caring sciences linnaeus university. she is also elected member of examining committee at public defense of phd dissertation 20120127 and 20120413 and the examiner of two thesis at linnaeus university. she was also deputy member of the examining committee at public defense of phd dissertation 20190614 at university west. åsa roxberg was also assigned peer reviewer for nine applications to a phd position at halmstad university. she was also the elected moderator of public defense of a thesis 2013 at linnaeus university.
 åsa roxberg was also the first opponent on the public defence of anne lise holms doctoral thesis august 28th 2009 stavanger university norway. further åsa roxberg has been the editor of the licentiate and other scientific publications at linnaeus university the department of health and caring sciences. she was also the selected guest editor 2019 for the international journal of qualitative health and wellbeing.
 in 2013 septemberoctober and 2015 october åsa roxberg was teaching at rangsit university bangkok as part of the linnaeus palme project as well as supervising her former doctoral student in udani thani province 2013 and chang mai province 2015 in the northern part of thailand were she also presented a paper at an international conference. åsa roxberg also held a presentation at den nordiske velferdsstats tause omsorgsfelt 8th and 9th november 2016 in bergen norway. further oral presentations was in dublin trinity college ireland 2021st june2018 at the 4th international conference of spirituality in healthcare and existential health at a conference in bergen 1516th may 2019. the conference was arranged by the network omsorgens grunnlag fenomener og villkår and the theme was critical perspectives on person care and aging
 consolationcomfort suffering hermeneutic phenomenology phenomenology health
 competence 1  intrapersonal spirituality and its impact on personcentred spiritual care
 space and place for health and care  nationalist discourses in swedish daily press during the first year of covid19
 space and place for health and care
 community nurses experiences of ethical dilemmas in palliative care  a swedish study.
 conceptual clarification of wellness and sense of coherence soc.  rodgers evolutionary concept analysis in health care settings
 administrative officer
 ashwin devotta about sicomap
 thirdcycle programmes
 the study programme
 assistance and representation
 health and safety
 regardless of whether you are employed by university west or you are athirdcycle student there you have the right to good working conditions. the head of the department is responsible for health and safety in the workplace. for more information see guidelines for health and safety in the workplace.
 the servicecenter is located in the ground floor of the ebuilding. here we provide service and support to students visitors and staff at university west.
 servicecenter supports
 itsupport
 finding your way in university building
 student and staff access card entrance printouts etc.
 student account
 study transcript and study information
 contact information about admission study counseling and administration
 facilities in university building
 the university library
 publication strategies open access or the publication of scientific results that are freely accessible on the internet
 parallel publication which means that a scholarly article is made accessible in an open archive even though it has also been published in a journal. parallel publication increases an articles visibility increasing the likelihood of references to it in other publications.
 bibliometrics or citation analysis through quantitative studies of scholarly publications measuring productivity and impact.
 help getting registered on the universitys publication database diva.
 the student union
 membership in the student union is voluntary. by joining the union you can receive extra assistance and support with regard to various questions that arise during your years of study. you can also participate in the unions activities and benefit from the discounts that the union has to offer.
 students have the right to be represented in all the advisory and decisionmaking bodies of the university. it is the student union that appoints these representatives.
 so that a student has an unbiased spokesperson to go to with questions about working conditions equality or discrimination there is a student ombudsman atthe university who works together with the student union to resolve such issues. the student ombudsmans task is to listen to what the student has to say with an open mind and help him or her to resolve issues having to do with equality working conditions and discrimination.
 read about sulf here.
 read about st here.
 gender equalityequal rightsdiversity
 no thirdcycle student or applicant should be exposed to offensive behaviour or discrimination at university west. discrimination of anyone based upon gender expressions of or identification with a transgender identity ethnicity religion or other creed sexual orientation disability or age is prohibited as clarified by the swedish discrimination act. this act has provisions that apply to institutions of higher learning and states that an education provider should conduct goaloriented work toward actively promoting equal rights for students and applicants.
 if you feel that you are being discriminated against the object of offensive behaviour or exposed to harassment you can go to see the student ombudsman at the student union student health or student services centre for help and support.
 the innovations counsellor
 international office
 the intrantional office works primarily with the processing of applications for excange programs and scholarships but also to expand the network of partner universitiea around the world.contact international@hv.se
 the university as a pubic authority
 laws and regulations
 the regulations that govern higher education institutions
 assistant senior lecturer in ai and automation
 associate professor and director for lina kristina johansson on leadership in digitalised organisations
 can you tell us a little bit about the school of business
 the school of business economics and it is multidisciplinary. we cover economics informatics political science surveying  our work covers a very diverse range of academic disciplines. students will get to interact with lots of professors and supervisors who are also instructors for our phd programmes in work integrated learning.
 what is the primary focus of the master in leadership in digitalised organisations?
 the main focus is to develop active leaders who have an agile leadership model. leadership 2.0 is collaborative and creates sustainable processes for social sustainability.
 to be socially sustainable we are trying to get beneath the layer of class ethnicity etc. to develop new ways of seeing people that foster equality and allow us to work together in better ways.
 old leadership values and styles are usually not sustainable innovative or agile. for example how should we really organise the workday? who should do which tasks? tasks are not always related to educational level they are more competence based. we are now building this new way of leading.
 sweden is historically known for creativity and critical thinking it makes sense that we are now fostering new leaders who can move quickly and create spaces  not boxes  for coworkers to move ahead within the company.
 how will students be able to interface with companies and organisations?
 some relevant projects on hand right now centre on digitalisation in schools for example. there is a european project on covid19 and studentstaff adjustments to new learning and social environments.
 we have projects within healthcare it and wellbeing organisations industry and wil as an educational model and philosophy.
 is there anything you want students interested in these fields to know?
 one thing is really important we have been working in wil for more than 30 years and we are a small university in a small city near a very big one. if youre interested in the relationship between theory and practice this is a great place to be. we have built a programme that we believe is actually going to create change.
 you can be an active driver of change in the field not limited to one sector. there are many opportunities. we are not treating you as a traditional student. we are trying to guide you in becoming an active agent in work life.
 learn about the master in leadership in digitalised organisations
 liasion librarian for the department of social and behavioural studies
 work tasks teacher information literacy
 a desire to access multidimension learning and personcentred careinterviews with persons living with type 2 diabetesalma dautovic susanne andersson eva brink ulla fredriksson larsson högskolan väst
 recovery after covid19 in association to respiratory function a two wave longitudinal studymarie engwall högskolan väst göran jutengren högskolan i östfold norge
 national institute of health nih
 cecilia thorsen
 the collaborative venture aura.i. augmented reality utilizing artificial. intelligence. aims to improve user interactions in augmented reality ar technology through the creation of an ai toolkit.
 the collaborative venture between sweden project coordinator spc gkn aerospace sweden ab university west extended reality xr and indian project leader ipl beebox studios aims to improve user interactions in augmented reality ar technology through the creation of an ai toolkit. this toolkit will integrate stateoftheart large language models llm with inputs and outputs provided by ar devices. the ai toolkit will be used to develop an ar application to assist in an automated visual inspection system avis developed at gkn. the primary objective is to provide users with realtime contextaware instructions and information via the ar application catering to both environmental conditions and individual preferences.this project addresses the need for enhanced user experiences in working with complex environments where decisionmaking is required.
 authentic
 authentic  automated thermographic inspection system for the inspection of aeronautic weldings
 adande  automatic data analysis within nondestructive evalutation
 nondestructive evaluation nde is a form of quality control where inspected objects are not destroyed by the procedure. the goal is to detect and characterize material deviations that might affect the objects properties. nde is used during manufacturing and later in the product life.
 the analysis of the nde measurement data and the subsequent interpretation to turn it into material quality decisions is often done manually by trained operators. clearly there is a strong interest within the swedish aerospace manufacturing industry to decrease this human effort in data analysis in order to stay competitive. however we predict that other manufacturing industries will have the similar needs due to digitalization e.g. the ones relying on 3d printed metal parts additive manufacturing.
 a recent vinnova produktion 2030 funded project automatic inspection and other possibilities at the introduction of digital xray inspection in the manufacturing industry swerea kimab gkn aerospace and volvo construction equipment found that scientific studies on xray inspection analysis in the last 15 years have aimed at a fully automatic methods given an expected fixed input variability. however in industry the unforeseen in terms of defects has to be considered during inspection of quality critical products this was identified as the reason for the limited industrial implementation to date.
 in this project we will instead explore semiautomatic approaches for data analysis rather than fully automatic ones. we will explore how an accurate and conservative estimation of confidences how certain the algorithm is combined with human operator interaction and active machine learning how to effectively choose when to query the human can solve this industrial problem.
 scientific valuemost of the automatic data analysis of xray images in industrial nde applications can be divided into four steps preprocessing segmentation feature extraction and classification. in this project the focus is on the last steps.
 industrial valuende as quality control in a production system is an essential part of rd driven high value manufacturing industries such as e.g. oil  gas and aerospace industry. the collected measurement data needs to be interpreted and translated to a decision in the production flow the amount of such measurement data is already large and will grow even larger with the digitalization trend. to stay competitive the amount of manual human interpretation work must therefore be reduced.
 automatic subtitling of videos is currently not working
 automatic subtitling of videos reach is currently not working at nordunet which effects our instance of hv play. they are investigating the issue.
 automatic thermography inspection of welded components with limited access  18weldt
 backgroundin order to accomplish the future targets of reducing the environmental impact of aviation effective cost efficient and reliable aero engines needs to be developed. by using the light weight technology based on fabrication developed by gkn aerospace engine systems sweden engine components can be built that meet those targets. with lighter structures the margin of safety might be reduced and this makes the requirement on the inspection to be even more important to secure the safety.
 the specialization at gkn aerospace engine systems sweden on nonrotating engine structures such as turbine cases call for cost effective and reliable methods for weld inspection. for future engine types such as open rotor where rotating structure are produced by fabrication this becomes even more important since such structures are to be considered as critical components.
 in this course the students will develop a literature review article of the subject field
 and do a presentation of the state of the art technology in the chosen topic of robotics  automation filed.
 minimum 15 he from the master programme in robotics 60 he including vtm605 scientific methods in robotics and automation 3 he credits and rbk600 robot certificate 1.5 he credits.
 the main components of this lab are two cnc machines four robots and several plc systems.
 the course consists of lectures on iec611313 programming standard plc programming techniques plc communications and supervisory control and plc programming laboratory exercise and teamwork project to automate a unique production line facility and written report about the project
 minimum 120 he credits from a bachelor program including 90 he credits in electrical computer science or mechanical engineering or similar fields and rbk600 robot certificate 1.5 he credits.
 introduction days are arranged in order to help all new international students at university west get started with their studies.
 attendance of the introduction days is mandatory.
 this is a great opportunity for students to become acquainted with university west and trollhättan. the introduction days take place digitally and inperson from august 28th to august 30th.
 if you cannot make it to these days we will have an introduction day each friday in september on campus from 1213. since the room might change please meet us  at the sofa outside service center at 12.
 please either join in person in f104 or this zoom link.
 wednesday august 28th
 950welcome by the international officetomas bengtsson veronika strupf roberta lauriola maria macdonald ebba thorolvsen  madeleine hoffman
 1005welcome from the vice chancellor mats jägstam
 1015introduction to university west veronika strupf  mirelle andersson from the service center
 1030introduction to it services filip hultbrand from the it department
 1045short activity
 1100introduction to academic studies  library elisabeth näverå from the university library
 1120accessibility and disability study support maria erlander from funka
 1130meet your study counselors degree students only raine zander  charlotta lundqvist from study counseling
 thursday august 29th
 1000meet the student union from university west student union shv
 1015introduction to ephic ephic representative from the student union
 1035kahoot activity
 1055meet the university chaplaincy andreas pervik from the swedish church
 1100welcome to university housing madeleine hoffman
 1115practical life in sweden veronika strupf
 friday august 30th
 1020what to do in trollhättan marcus pallvid from city trollhättan
 1030rules  regulations in sweden trollhättan police
 1100student health service introduction maria blomqvist  annette ryckenberg from from the student health service
 change room to f123
 1130 exchange students only in f123presentation for the school of engineering sciences hanna aknouchemartinsson international coordinator
 1145 exchange students only in f123presentation for the school of business economics and it wilma lundqvistwestin international coordinator
 1155 exchange students only in f123presentation for the language culture and communication course in sweden sofia davydenko university lecturer
 1300 meet outside the main entrance find it herecity tour maria blomqvist  annette ryckenberg from from the student health service
 university wests ikea tripthis activity requires registration due to limited space on the bus. we will send you a confirmation email closer to departure if you have received a spot. if you have not received a spot you will be automatically placed on the waiting list and will receive a spot once one opens up.
 if you decide not to join after signing up please contact international@hv.se so we can give your spot to the next person on the waiting list.
 you can register for this activity through this sign up form.
 1030 requires registrationikea trip meet at university parking lot1100 bus leaves from university west to ikea1700 bus leaves from ikea to university westif you miss the bus leaving from ikea you can take bus 860 named mot trollhättan via uddevalla påstigning
 you need to accept cookies
 marketing cookies needs to be accepted to view this resource.
 in the autumn we have a welcome programme which includes our arrival day and autumn introduction days.
 our autumn arrival day occurs on august 27th. international students can find more information about how to pick up their keys if they received them from us and how to get to the university. more information can be found through here.
 our introduction days occur from august 28th30th. this is where international students are introduced to university west through activities and speakers. for students that are not able to come during this time we also have small introductions every friday in september from 12001300 location tbd. more information can be found through here.
 it services and support
 available software
 here we present the software that you have access to when you study at university west. besides the software available on the computers on campus there are software programs that you are entitled to download and install on your personal computer as long as you are a student or staff at university west.
 software for your private computer
 the university tries as far as possible to sign software agreement where students and staff should be able to install the software on their personal computer. from the following suppliers you are entitled to download software and install on your personal computer as long as you are a student or employee at university west.
 ibm spss statistics. computer program for statistical analysis.
 matlab. computer program and program language for mathematical and technical calculations.
 microsoft azure dev tools for teaching. ms operating systems and software not office.
 microsoft office
 nvivo. software for qualitative data analysis qda.
 tortalk. speech synthesis software.
 please note
 university west cannot take responsibility for your installation provide support for it or take responsibility for any errors.
 you should read the eula end user license agreement before installing the programs.
 software on university computers
 at university west there are about two hundred softwares installed. these are distributed on the universitys student computers in different levels according to license availability and hardware requirements.
 examinationexamen
 forskare                        phd in nondestructive evaluation
 avancerade tillverkningsprocesser advanced manufacturing processes
 avancerade tillverkningsprocesser advanced manufacturing processes 2.5 hp
 recent developments in manufacturing techniques are providing extraordinary benefits such as unique joint properties synergistic mix of materials component cost reduction increased productivity and improved quality the ability to manufacture complex geometrical configurations and reliable assessment of the suitability of novel materials for the manufacture of new sustainable industrial products. the course aims to assist industrial personnel update their knowledge and widen their understanding of various aspects of newadvanced industrial manufacturing processes. the course delivers a general overview of the utilization of advanced manufacturing methods for production and quality management. on successful completion of the course students will have acquired increased knowledge about the selection of processes for different industrial application conditions operational process characteristics of advanced manufacturing and the fundamentals underlying process and parameter choices of advanced manufacturing techniques.
 professionals within the manufacturing industry.
 the course comprises the following themes
 micro and nanojoining
 therrmal spray technologies
 hybrid joining processes
 recent developments in manufacturing showcasing the benefits of advanced manufacturing techniques
 theoretical background process parameters novel aspects process capabilities and process variants and their application
 three years of higher education bachelor level in engineering  technology bachelor degree corresponding to 180cp. alternatively relevant professional work experience.
 for more information please contact produktionskurser@hv.se
 recent developments in manufacturing techniques are providing extraordinary benefits such as unique joint properties synergistic mix of materials component cost reduction increased productivity and improved quality the ability to manufacture complex geometrical configurations and reliable assessment of the suitability of novel materials for the manufacture of new sustainable industrial products. the course aims to assist industrial personnel update their knowledge and widen their understanding of various aspects of newadvanced industrial manufacturing processes. the course delivers a general overview of the utilization of advanced manufacturing methods for production and quality management.
 the course is mainly delivered via distance learning in flexible netbased form with one or two physical meetings. online lectures are combined with supervision and reporting meetings using webbased meeting systems. some course meetings are compulsory.
 industry and academy
 this course has been developed in collaboration with industry partners within the framework of one of our educational projects. the project aims to provide courses at the advanced level to a mix of professionals and students to strengthen the swedish industrys competitiveness.
 we apply validation of work experience to see if you have knowledge that corresponds to the eligibility requirements for the course. do not forget to attach a description if you are applying based on work experience a form is available on our website
 christina axelsson
 tomas bengtsson
 rekryterare                        director international affairs
 location
 this event will be held in swedish
 bachelor in international mechanical engineering
 big data additive manufacturing electric vehicles lightweight components and advanced materials have created a new frontier for incoming mechanical engineers. now successful engineers need knowledge of manufacturing processes materials science robotics and automation electric vehicles and supply chain management. this broad training isnt available in traditional programmes. thats why our international multidisciplinary englishtaught programme is built in collaboration with industry to prepare you for work or advanced study in integrated systems.
 apply now
 why this programme
 courses developed in partnership with industry your training is influenced by the realworld needs of our partner companies. upon graduation you will be qualified as a highly skilled and indemand mechanical engineer.
 learn from company experts throughout your studies you will have opportunities to engage with and learn from company experts through guest lectures onsite study visits and collaborative experiments.
 industrial placement course earn credit while working for an international company over 12 semesters during your third year. you will spend 50 of your time working in a company in europe asia or south america and 50 studying at a partner university in the same country.
 international thesis work you can also opt to complete your final thesis within your industrial placement.
 access to experts and advanced laboratories
 worldleading welding technologies
 additive manufacturing3d printing technologies
 cuttingedge thermal spraying
 cnc milling and turning equipment
 measurement and control systems for in situ monitoring and inspection
 advanced materials processing and characterisation
 testing and characterisation equipment
 microstructural inspection and microanalysis including optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy
 geometrical and surface topography assessment using 3d profilometry
 phase analysis using xray diffractometry
 mechanical testing including microhardness mapping tensile and fatigue at room and high temperatures
 thermomechanical simulation and testing using a gleeble welding simulator
 weldability testing using varestraint variablerestraint technique
 wear corrosion and electrochemical investigations in various environments at room and high temperatures
 nondestructive testing using ultrasound xray infrared camera and eddy current
 machining dynamics measurement and test equipment rotating and stationary dynamometers impact hammers accelerometers etc.
 multidisciplinary approach
 manufacturing is undergoing a shift from isolated optimised cells in factories to fully integrated systems. traditional mechanical engineering programmes no longer prepare engineers to meet the needs of industry. nowadays there are new competences expected for the new engineers factory of the future industry 4.0 lifelong learning future production additive manufacturing big data management among others are hot topic concepts and we need to prepare multidisciplinary engineers to cope with the current and future industrial needs and to be flexible to adapt to changes. that is the reason for our multidisciplinary focus in the programme.
 international industry placement and study abroad
 you will have the option to spend 12 semesters of your third year abroad in europe asia or south america jointly with a corporate and university partner.
 the programme also offers opportunities for international exposure in the form of study abroad for semester exchange and summer schools at one of our partner universities.
 you will complete your industrial placement while continuing to build your theoretical knowledge at a partner university. you will then complete your bachelors thesis in collaboration with your choice of the following
 your original international industrial placement company
 another location within the same company multinational such as volvo with branches in china india europe etc.
 a second international company
 an international academic partner
 university wests ptw
 you may also choose to stay in sweden for your industrial placement. in sweden youll have the choice between working with a swedish company or within the university wests ptw.
 smallscale and personal
 university west offers an intimate campus environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. the teachertostudent ratio is higher than at most comparable programmes at other universities.
 while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to dedicate focus and resources to mechanical engineering. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 students from around the globe come together in your programme to create a unique and international environment. the programme is fully taught in english and you will study together with students from sweden as well as countries in asia europe and south america.
 this is complimentary to the option to spend time in an industry placement abroad at one or more of our partner companies and universities during your third year.
 the job market for mechanical engineers is extremely good. multidisciplinary highskilled engineers such as graduates from this programme are very sough after.
 as an example swedens need for engineers with a background in electric vehicles will be 30000 in the next coming years. there is a very high demand for mechanical engineers in sweden.
 with training in this rapidly expanding field of technology where innovation is prioritised you will have the choice between advanced studies or a career in industry both in sweden and abroad.
 university wests clearly states that sustainability is an important  developement area in all its three dimensions economic social and environmental.
 trough the programme the students will gain knowledge that promotes sustainability awareness in connection to their future endeavors. within the field of logic control engineering in materials selection and in their thesis work the students will design and evaluate products processes and systems i relation to economical social and ecological sustainable development. sustainability is also a key element that naturally arises as a result of the programmes regular interaction with industry.
 about the programme
 in this threeyear multidisciplinary bachelor of science degree programme youll develop an understanding of future factories materials and production. your programme will cover the main aspects of production technology where its base is mechanical engineering.
 mechanical engineering
 manufacturing engineering
 materials science and engineering
 logistics and supply chain management
 by the end of your programme you will be able to
 choose design or improve manufacturing processes by considering the behaviour of materials during the process and their impact on final products
 program robots and design automation during manufacturing
 manage the logistics and supply chain in manufacturing
 work in the multidisciplinary field of electric vehicles
 course overview
 youll gain practical experience through assignments as well as group and individual projects in close collaboration with corporate leaders in the industry. in the third year of your programme youll have the opportunity to complete an industrial placement and study abroad in europe asia or south america.
 the total programme is 180 credits in accordance with the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects. the planned courses in the programme are as follows
 courses that the study programme comprises
 ethics for engineers 25 credits
 introduction to programming with python 5 credits
 machine element i 25 credits
 manufacturing i 25 credits
 mathematics a 75 credits
 technical drawing and cad 5 credits
 feedback control engineering 5 credits
 finite element method mathematical formulation and applications 5 credits
 introduction to electric vehicle systems and components 5 credits
 logic control engineering 25 credits
 logistic 5 credits
 materials science and engineering 75 credits
 mathematical statistics 5 credits
 mathematics b 75 credits
 mechanics 75 credits
 metallurgy 5 credits
 robotics and automation 5 credits
 sensor technology 25 credits
 strength of materials 75 credits
 thermodynamics and heat transfer mathematical formulation and analytic solution 5 credits
 bachelor thesis work  international mechanical engineering  225 credits
 please note that some of the courses might be subject to change according to the lastest requirements and updates of the programme.see also programme syllabus.
 educational methods
 thesis
 overall we use traditional but also flippedclassed lectures we have problemsolving sessions industrially and practically oriented industrybased assignments use industrial software in problemsolving tasks projects developed in companies we have guest lecturers study visits and virtual and industrially equipped laboratories among other methods.
 upon completion of this bachelors programme you will receive a bachelor of international mechanical engineering bsc 180 credits.
 career and further education
 factory systems are currently in transition from isolated optimised cells where employees perform repetitive tasks to fully integrated systems. this means companies are in need of engineers who understand the whole supply chain. your programme prepares you for the current and future needs of industry where engineers with multidisciplinary backgrounds are required.
 companies are also looking for engineers with international interpersonal skills to improve effectiveness in global operations  an additional component of this programme. on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or further advanced studies.
 this degree qualifies you to hold positions such as
 mechanical engineer
 manufacturing engineer
 production engineer
 additive manufacturing engineer
 supply chain manager
 robotics and automation engineer
 automotive engineer
 youll be highly sought after by multinational corporations worldwide. in sweden a shortage of 30000 engineers is predicted through 2030. there is low competition for jobs in mechanical engineering in sweden because of the quickly expanding job market where there is constant development in industry.
 in addition multinational companies such as nevs volvo group skf esab volvo car vattenfall gkn aerospace and cevt are located near university west. these employers are looking for multidisciplinary engineers with the international competencies gained in your programme.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field of mechanical engineering. develop the qualifications you need to pursue your masters and phd in a related field in production technology such as materials and additive manufacturing or digital supply chain management.
 after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad. university west offers the following related advanced degrees
 master in manufacturing engineering
 master in robotics and automation
 admission and application
 you will be considered for admission to the bachelor in international mechanical engineering programme if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 previous education
 you need to hold the equivalent of a swedish upper secondaryhigh school diploma general entry requirement with minimum entry requirements for mathematics physics and chemistry see programme syllabus for more details.
 the english language requirement is the equivalent of english studies at the upper secondary high school level in sweden. learn about proof of english proficiency.
 if you have any questions please send us an email at study@universitywest.se
 university west uses a national application system run by university admissions in sweden. it is only possible to apply during the application period which starts from june. the application procedure basically consists of three steps
 apply online on
 submit your documents on  . deadline will be confirmed in your application confirmation generally around two weeks after the application deadline.
 pay the application fee if applicable on    . deadline will be confirmed in your application confirmation generally around two weeks after the application deadline.
 more detailed information about the application procedure.
 we follow the documents that is written at universityadmissions.se additional specifik documents besides that.
 students with citizenship in countries not within the eueea or switzerland are required to pay an application fee in order to get their application processed. the application fee is sek 900 swedish kronor.
 not sure if you need to pay the application fee? this list of questions will help you.
 tuition fee and scholarships
 tuition fee
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 115000 per year. you will pay the tuition fee per semester in six instalments.
 students with citizenship in countries not within the eueea or switzerland are required to pay tuition fees for university studies in sweden. for more information about tuition fees and exceptions you can check universityadmissions.se.
 scholarships
 university west does not offer scholarships for students in undergraduate programmes.
 name of the programme
 bachelor of science bsc in international mechanical engineering
 3 years 180 credits
 pace of instruction
 scholarship available
 eueea citizens are generally exempted from paying tuition fee
 do you want to learn more about living costs student accommodation getting a residence permit and many other practical matters? then read our section about practicalities.
 more information and contact
 upcoming events
 heres an overview of upcoming events and webinars.
 sign up for our newsletter
 sign up here to receive the latest updates from university west straight into your mailbox.
 my end goal is to specialize in sustainable manufacturing.
 that gets me excited  seeing how the theoretical is applied directly to the real world
 derek clifford louis
 our program aims to prepare students for a future that is not yet written.
 program manager and associate professor
 receive the latest updates from university west straight into your mailbox
 read more about the hometown of university west
 bachelor programmes
 embark on an exciting academic adventure in sweden. explore a world of cuttingedge knowledge and a supportive learning environment. university west welcomes you to a future filled with educational opportunities and cultural enrichment.
 international programme in politics and economics
 in this bachelors programme youll get to study the integration of politics and economics in a global context that also considers histories cultures and societies.
 international mechanical engineering
 bachelors programme spring intake. today successful engineers need knowledge of materials robotics automation electric vehicles and more
 receive the latest new from university west straight into your mailbox
 see all our programmes here.
 school of business economics and it
 bachelor studies
 information about our bachelor programs.
 our bachelor programs
 the bachelor programme in business administration with a choice of specialization in either marketing management or accounting.
 the bachelor programme in economics with a choice of specialization in either finance insurance or estate agent.
 the bachelor programme in it informaticsinformation systems is focusing on either software development digital media or 3d animation and visualization.
 the bachelor programme in politicspolitical science.
 the bachelor programme in politicspolitical science is fully taught in english for both swedish and international students and open for the entire three years of studies for international students. you can also major in political science.
 we have collaboration with selected universities worldwide such as the netherlands czech republic uk south africa and china.
 international program in politics and economics ippe 180 ects entire
 ippe provides an appropriate blend of analytical skills and practical work integrated experiences that are useful in key employment opportunities.
 final bachelor year
 business administration marketing 60 ects economics finance 60 ects
 students from partner universities can study their final undergraduate year in marketing and finance at university west. after one year of studies and passed courses students can obtain a swedish bachelor degree in business administration or economics. besides the courses in marketing studies will hold courses in statistics economic geography and management.
 for business administration the studies will hold courses like corporate finance financial methods and banking. for economics the studies will hold courses like corporate finance financial methods and banking. at the end students write a final bachelor thesis.
 overview of programmes
 our bachelors and masters programmes taught in english.
 open for application
 bachelor in international mechanical engineering 3 years fulltime on campus 180 credits. spring intake.
 bachelors programmes
 international programme in politics and economics  ippe 3 years fulltime on campus 180 credits. autumn intake.
 master in leadership in digitalised organisations 2 yearsfulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 master in sustainable development 2 yearsfulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 master in work integrated political studies 2 yearsfulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 master in finance 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in international business 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in it and management 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in cybersecurity 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in computer science  software engineering 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in operations and supply chain management 2 yearsfulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 master in ai and automation 2 yearsfulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 master in ai and automation 1 yearsfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in electric engineering 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.the programme is set to start in august 2025.
 master in electromechanical vehicle engineering 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in welding technology 2 yearsfulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 master in manufacturing engineering 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in manufacturing engineering 2 years fulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 master in robotics and automation 1 yearfulltime on campus 60 credits. autumn intake.
 master in robotics and automation 2 yearsfulltime on campus 120 credits. autumn intake.
 distance learning
 master in electromechanical vehicle engineering 1 yearfulltime distance learning 60 credits
 master in robotics and automation 1 yearfulltime distance learning 60 credits
 master in robotics and automation 2 yearsparttime distance learning 60 credits
 here youll find all you need to know about application and admission.
 tuition fees  scholarships
 here you will find more information about tuition fees and scholarships.
 do you want to learn more about our programmes or do you have a question? get in touch with us were happy to help you as much and as fast as we can.
 johansson b. 2023 june. bilingual biscriptal children with and without dyslexia read and write in persian l1 and swedish l2 paper presentation. international symposium on bilingualism australia. sydney.
 johansson b. under review. meaning making and writing processes across languages and genres a case study of two bilingual biscriptal children with reading difficulties.
 johansson b. rijlaarsdam g. 2023. writing fluency predicted by reading linguistic and cognitive skills in l1 and l2 in the writing of bilingual biscriptal persianswedish children. l1 educational studies in language and literature 23 pp. 128
 johansson b. 2022. linguistic abilities related to word reading in persian and swedish. reading in a foreign language 34 pp. 325348
 johansson b. 2022. two languages two scripts bilingual and biscriptal children with and without reading difficulties read and write in persian l1 and swedish l2 doctoral dissertation umeå universitet.
 johansson b.  lindgren e. 2021. fluency and its relationship with typology exposure and lexical retrieval in bilingual persianswedish childrens writing. l1 educational studies in language and literature 21 pp. 128
 johansson b.  lindgren e. 2018 august. writing fluency of bilingual biscriptal children with and without reading and writing difficulties paper presentation. sig writing conference brussels. belgium.
 johansson b. 2017 june. the challenges and strength of language literacy and cognitive skills of bilingual biscriptal children with and without reading and writing difficulties dyslexia paper presentation. arle conference estonia. tallin.
 johansson b.  lindgren e. 2016 july. a bilingual biscriptal child with dyslexia writes a case study of writing processes paper presentation. sig writing conference manchester. england.
 handout
 pac projektetet finansieras av national institute of health i usa.
 björquist e. persson s.  molin m. 2024. there is a fear of not being super knowledgeable  social workers striving to enhance childrens participation in the assessment process for disability support. european journal of social work. published online 20240104.
 persson s. 2023. agenda 2030 and differently abled childrens participation in lssinvestigationstalking mats. sustainable development  human wellbeing a social work perspective. bishop heber college tiruchirappali india. february 10th 2023
 text
 the student handbook
 basic university regulations
 since university west is a state authority it is also subject to special statutes for universities the higher education act and higher education ordinance as well as those regulations that apply to all state organisations such as the administrative procedure act and government agencies ordinance.
 the principle of public access
 the university is subject to regulations under the freedom of the press act regarding public access. this means that all information that is registered about you as an individual student is publicly accessible. exceptions can only be made if granted under the publicity and secrecy act  see below regarding students in need of protection.
 the purpose of the general data protection regulation gdpr is to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals in particular their right to protection of personal data.
 personal data is anything that can be traced back to a living person. examples of such information are personal identity number name and address. read more about gdpr and how we process your personal data at university west.
 study documentation ladok is a national study documentation database that registers the details of people applying to university and those who are studying at university. ladok contains information about admissions courses on which you are registered and results.the database can be used for administrative tasks within a relatively broad remit without special permission from students.how can i find out what information is kept about me? you can submit a request in writing and you will be entitled to receive a printout from the database as soon as possible. the information should normally be supplied within a month of your request being submitted. there is no charge for one printout per year. you can submit your request to the student centre.what if there is an error in the database? the person responsible for processing personal data is obliged to rectify block or delete on request any information that is incorrect or incomplete and as soon as possible with regard to the purpose of the processing.
 appeals
 certain decisions that affect you as an individual student can be appealed against if the decision has not gone in your favour. appeals are handled by the higher education appeals board  a public authority similar to a court  which decides whether a decision should be changed or whether it should stand unless the university changes its previous decision voluntarily.you will find information about the kind of decisions that can be appealed against under the relevant heading below.
 basics of electrical engineering for electric vehicles parttime campus gee100
 basics of electrical engineering for electric vehicles 7.5 hp
 course content is calculations of both direct and alternating currentcircuits. the work regarding the alternating current circuits includes both 1 and 3phase the jomega method and active and reactive power. the course also introduces basic theory for calculations on magnetic circuits and difference between the quantitys energy and power.
 degree of bachelor of science in mechanical engineering or equivalent. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 he credits in programming and 15 he credits in mathematics. in addition verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english benglish 6 in the swedish upper secondary school or equivalent.
 the european commissions support for the production of this publication does not constitute an endorsement of the contents which reflect the views only of the authors and the commission cannot be held responsible for any use which may be made of the information contained therein.
 qm soft as
 easy learning solutions as
 staff member at division of media production.
 to read more about me please visit
 to read my dissertation please visit
 beatrice mattsson
 staff member at department of health sciences.
 become an si leader
 si   stands for supplemental instruction. it means that an experienced student the si leader acts as a guide in a subject for other students.
 what does an si leader do?
 the si leader must prepare and lead conversations about the parts of the course that the students find difficult and help the students understand the course content together.
 what do you get as an si leader out of the assignment?
 you develop your communicative and pedagogical skills
 you train your leadership skills
 you get indepth subject knowledge.
 you receive a fee for the assignment.
 do you want to become an si leader?
 a prerequisite for being able to apply for the assignment is that you yourself have passed the course you want to become an si leader in. in addition you must undergo a training organized by university west after you have applied for the assignment.
 what is it like to become an si leader?
 jayanth chetan and prakruth si leaders on the master in advanced manufacturing engineering 2020 programme say
 we started the twoyear program last year and we are the first litter to be si leaders. we can talk about the courses and be a bit like older brothers.
 it is a good experience to find solutions to difficulties that arise.
 i notice that the students appreciate it. you give and take. for an international student it is extra difficult the first few days so we help answer all kinds of questions. they can ask us anything
 we have received a lot of appreciation from the students we have helped. and its funny that so many came somewhere between 6575 of all the students in the cohort. i enjoy leading and getting the students involved in the courses. it is rewarding to help other students.
 its like a job. i finished my studies in june but have continued to work as an si leader in parallel with another job. many appreciate having someone to ask who is not a teacher.
 the former si leaders agree that the assignment has contributed to
 a deeper understanding of the subject.
 that they learned a lot by teaching others.
 that they developed their leadership qualities
 learn more
 supplementary instructor
 contact us if you want to know more about si leaders and our work
 before start of studies
 checklist before starting your studies at university west. its highly recommended to read through all points in this text.
 1. pay tuition fee if applicable
 if you are required to pay tuition fee you have received or will receive an invoice attached to your letter of acceptance. follow the instructions that came with the invoice and make sure your payment is received by the university before the deadline mentioned in the invoice. if you do not pay your tuition fee on time your admission will be cancelled.
 2. apply for a residence permit if applicable
 the application for a residence permit takes quite some time. therefore it is essential that you apply for a residence permit as soon as you have received your letter of acceptance or a confirmation of selection results for exchange students and paid your tuition fee if applicable.
 the fastest way to get a residence permit is to apply online at the website of the swedish migration agency and make sure that the application is complete.
 3. book accommodation
 at the beginning of november all admitted international students will receive an email with information about how to apply online for student accommodation. follow the instructions and make sure to book your accommodation promptly once application is open.
 read more about accommodation for international students
 4. plan your journey and arrival
 on arrival day international student representatives will welcome you at gothenburg landvetter airport and gothenburg central station as well as at trollhättan station to guide you how you reach trollhättan and your accommodation. arrival day is on 12 january. please look at when your housing contract starts before arriving
 read more about arrival day here.
 right after arrival day the introduction days will start. you will receive more information about the exact programme in december. our spring introduction days are happening digitally from january 810th. in the meanwhile you can check the information about the introduction days on our website.
 5. create your account and register for your studies
 you have to create a student account to get access to all university systems and your university email. you will receive more information about how to do this in the registration mail.all international students have to register for their studies. if you do not register on time your admission will be cancelled. all international students will receive a socalled registration email with a link and further instructions. this email will be sent to the email address you provided on universityadmissions.seantagning.se degree students or in mobilityonline exchange students. if you havent received any mail from us by the end of december we recommend you check your spam folder or have it resent.
 if you have been a student with us before you should use your old account should you need to activate your old account or if you have forgotten your password you go to my account and select unable to login.
 video about the student account
 6. log in to canvas
 through the learning platform canvas you will get access to the material schedule curriculum and list of literature related to the courses you are taking. the platform also contains contact information of teachers and questions and answers related to the course content.
 your courses will be available in canvas four weeks prior to the course start. please note that the course schedule will be preliminary until two weeks before the course starts.
 to be able to use all university digital services you need to verify your login through twostep verification or multifactor authentication mfa. to get started you need to activate mfa. its easiest to do it via a computer.
 see more information and get started.
 10. learn more about ladok canvas and office 365.
 in ladok you will be able to print certificates for your studies register for courses view your results register for examinations and verify or update your contact information.
 in canvas you will always find information about your course schedule and literature list.
 microsoft office 365 is a platform for email calendar file storage etc. it is important that you use your student email because university west will send most information to this email address.
 read more and login to office 365.
 11. check information about distance learning if applicable
 if you have been admitted to a distance programme or course you can read more about distance learning on our website.
 12. prepareapply for support for students with a disability if applicable
 if you have a disability for example dyslexia a visual impairment hearing loss or adhd we can provide you with pedagogical support during your studies.
 read more about support for students with a disability
 related information and contacts
 frequently asked questions
 before you start your education
 information about study and careers advice entry requirements etc.
 study and careers advice
 study and careers advice can provide support before during and after your studies. the careers advisors are based at the student centre and they offer general information and individual study and careers advice. those advisors who are linked to the various departments provide more indepth information about each programme and subject area.
 support to students with disabilities
 if you have a disability that may affect your studies then you are entitled to support to enable you to study under the same conditions as your fellow students. in order to receive support you need to provide a certificate or other document explaining your condition and setting out your needs. the support is based on your needs which means that there are no readymade solutions. it is important that you contact the coordinators for support to students well in advance of your education start so that the university can offer you the best possible support. when you apply to the university send a copy of your application together with your certificate to the coordinators at university west. the coordinators are based at the student centre.
 students in needs of protection
 there may be special reasons for a student to request that their personal data be protected. the reason may for example be that you are experiencing some kind of threat against your person. having protected personal data means that you are given another identity on the universitys system.
 applying for a courseprogramme
 all university courses and programmes require you to have a certain level of previous knowledge. these are the entry requirements. these requirements are essential in order for you to be able to cope with and complete your education. fulfilling the entry requirements does not guarantee you a place see section below on selection. entry requirements are divided up into general and specific requirements.
 starting a course or a programme at university level requires you to have attained general entry requirements. you can achieve general entry requirements in various ways for example via your final grades from completing your upper secondary school education. for further information about how to attain general entry requirements contact a study advisor or read on below.
 several courses or programmes demand specific previous knowledge in addition to the general entry requirements. such requirements may include having passed one or more specific courses at secondary level. some courses or programmes require you to have completed courses at university.
 prior learning and experience
 you may have a great deal of knowledge that can entirely or partly qualify you for a particular education despite the fact that you may lack formal qualifications from secondary school adult education or equivalent. if you apply to be assessed on the basis of your prior learning and experience then the university makes an overall assessment of your knowledge and experience from work club activities from extended periods abroad staff training andor other courses. the aim is to form a judgement as to whether your combined skills meet the entry requirements for the course or programme to which you are applying. if your prior learning and experience is accepted it does not guarantee you a place. if you are applying on the basis of prior learning and experience then you will most likely be required to take the university entrance exam in order to be included in the selection process for the education.
 exemptions are when an applicant who is deemed capable of coping with the education without having fulfilled the entry requirements is exempt from one or more of the requirements for a specific education during a specific admissions round. if you would like to apply for exemption your application should be supported in a separate letter attached to your application.
 selection
 the number of qualified applications for a course or a programme often outnumbers the number of places available in which case a selection process is carried out. selection for undergraduate education is based chiefly on grades from upper secondary school and the results of the university entrance exam but there are also other selection groups. the selection process normally happens in two stages selection 1 and selection 2.
 special selection
 a special selection process is applied to some of the programmes at university west. this means that a small proportion of the places are allocated to applicants who are assessed based on criteria other than grades and the results of the entrance exam. please note that the entry requirements still apply.
 after a selection has been made you will see from your admissions letter whether you have been accepted been given a reserve place or if your application has been rejected. you will find further information about when admissions letters are sent out at antagning.se. if you have been offered a place or a reserve place in an admissions round that has two selections then you must respond to the first admissions letter in order to keep your place. the deadline for responses is stated in the admissions letter. please note that you can only respond to an admissions decision at antagning.se.
 some of the decisions that are made about your application for a university education and that you are informed of via an admissions letter can be appealed against. you can only appeal against decisions regarding qualifications and rejections when applying on the basis of prior learning and experience and exemptions.if you have identified obvious errors in the handling of your application for example an incorrectly registered upper secondary school grade then you should not appeal. you should instead contact admissions immediately so that we can rectify the error.for further information regarding rules and entitlements in relation to admissions to courses or programmes at university west please refer to the universitys admission regulations.
 if you have been offered a place on a course or a programme at university west but are unable to take up the place for particular reasons then you can defer the start of your education.special reasons for deferring the start of your studies may be social medical or may be related to other particular circumstances such as caring for a child national service student union assignments or postponed leave according to the employees right to educational leave act.more detailed instructions are available on the back of the form on which you make your application.a negative decision regarding deferment can be appealed against at the higher education appeals board.
 antagningsservice
 economics of religion
 goaloriented process plans in a multiagent system for plug amp produce
 productivityenergy optimisation of trajectories and coordination for cyclic multirobot systems
 improved constructive cooperative coevolutionary differential evolution for largescale optimisation
 simulationbased time and jerk optimisation for robotic press tending
 a constructive cooperative coevolutionary algorithm applied to press line optimisation
 toward efficient geometrical simulation and virtual commissioning in stamping
 a faster collision detection method applied on a sheet metal press line
 timesynchronised hardwareintheloop simulation  applied to sheetmetal press optimisation
 virtual realtime model  a tool for increased production
 a virtual realtime model for control software development  applied on a sheetmetal press line
 simulation based optimization of a sheetmetal press line
 general time synchronisation method for plc programs aiming at virtual verification and development
 multiobjective constructive cooperative coevolutionary optimization of robotic pressline tending
 modeling and optimization of hybrid systems for the tweeting factory
 constructive cooperative coevolutionary optimisation for interacting production stations
 optimised control of sheet metal press lines
 optimisation of interacting production stations using a constructive cooperative coevolutionary approach
 an efficient algorithm for press line optimisation
 efficient geometrical simulation and virtual commissioning performed in stamping
 sheetmetal press line parameter tuning using a combined direct and neldermead algorithm
 automated generation of discrete event system simulation models for flexible automation
 methods for reliable simulationbased plc code verification
 offline optimisation of complex automated production lines  applied on a sheetmetal press line
 bet  better effect of training
 bet will help improving the fabrication vet system for staff working in fabrication industry. the new incompany team system will target this area thus offering a system solution with standarized and harmonized methods for support during the theoretical training phases and in particular the work based training to be organized at companies that may be located in remotly geographical areas.
 to realise the ambitious growth targets set by each fabrication country in europe will require a flexible and mobile workforce with the skills and knowledge to implement the new fabrication and assembly methods and technologies deployed by the leading multinational fabrication and supplying companies. this growth in fabrication must be achieved efficiently alongside high standards of health environment and safety regulations the mitigation of environmental impact and new ict skills. this necessitates an upgrading of workforce skills and qualifications through the deployment of more innovative and accessible workbased learning systems that can fully motivate and support staff development and the attainment of nationally recognised qualifications that are respected by industry.
 number and profiles of participants
 whilst there are some effective vet systems to support youth development most notably in norway and sweden mature entrants are not so well served. they currently lack structured incompany support during work based training activites and practice including support from tutoring staff during learning and implementation of theory at companies that may be located far away from the vet providers. at the same time too many staff with strong practical skills face learning and writing disabillities while other experience challenges related to the young school leavers. in some countries like hungary once in employment formal vet pathways leading to the completion of a national qualifications nqs in fabricatin are hard to access or not well supported. approximately only 10 of the inspector workfoce in norway and sweden has got a nq. therefore most of the workforce remains unqualified and highly dependent on informal inhouse training nonformal vet provided by the companies themselves.
 the ultimate goal is to develop a new team supported work based learning process within fabrication vet that improves the conditions for learning theory for inspector opperative staff with strong practical skills but which at the same time are challenged with learning and writing disabillities or has experienced to be a school leaver. it enables individuals informal competences and skills to become recognised and accepted within fabrication nq and built on through individualised and group learning supported processes.
 this partnership will develop and pilot a system for the delivery of innovative individualised work based learning practices supported by incompany teams. the prerequisite processes recognising prior learning and flexible learning resources will be aligned to a shared framework of industry endorsed learning outcomes. the continuous assessment of practical competence at the workplace will involve employers and inform nq assessment results that are understood by the main fabrication companies in europe. consequently workbased vet pathways and qualifications will gain parity of esteem and learner mobility will be promoted aided by european tools including eqf and ecvet. the european industrys aim of promoting knowledge exchange between the main fabrication countries and collective problem solving will be synergised by the shared learning system.
 there is a gap between the ambitions of the industry and the current training methods which do not take into account how many staff that are champions in problem solving while they at the same time avoid and fears the required theoretical training. this will be resolved by developing
 a common framework of learning outcomes for european fabrication developed through a formalized fabrication skills and vet provider network
 new workbased learning and assessment delivery systems and resources that increase capacity for fabrication skills instruction and contribute to a quality assured assessment and formal vet delivery system supported by their vet providers
 national workbased learning delivery partnerships and support teams that will update fabrication vet resources shared by the vet provider network and their industry associated partners
 piloting the delivery of fabrication nqs to workbased learners utilising shared resources and evaluating the learners experiences to inform the development of improved teams supported vet learning systems
 the overall mission is to improve the accessibility and quality of workbased learning for inspector operatives at two levels and start preparíng for harmonisation of industry endorsed nq hereby promoting learner and skilled labour mobility.
 key action cooperation for innovation and the exchange of good practices
 action type strategic partnerships for vocational education and training
 to learn more visitbet
 bet_in_a_nutshell_compressed.pdf
 bet_inspection_oriented_learning_with_rpl_english_v3_compressed.pdf
 bet_product_oriented_learning_inspection_english_v2_compressed.pdf
 what_can_bet_do_for_you_compressed.pdf
 io1  awareness hv20210323.pptx
 christina cliffordson
 bewbu  blended education in western balkan univesitites
 the bewbu project strives to enhance institutional capacities and elevate pedagogical competencies in higher education across western balkan universities.
 the bewbu project strives to enhance institutional capacities and elevate pedagogical competencies in higher education across western balkan universities. it emphasizes the integration of blended education be into university programs to foster flexibility in response to crises increase inclusivity and democratize the educational process. the primary objectives include incorporating be models into western balkan university programmes to meet the needs of students in the digital age and facilitate their integration into the regional and european labour markets. the backdrop of the covid19 pandemic prompted higher education institutions in the western balkans rushed to adopt online learning. while universities invested in online systems insufficient attention was given to the comprehensive planning design development and evaluation of online learning processes. the bewbu project recognizes the imperative for a wellstructured digital education aligned with the demands of contemporary society.
 addressing shared challenges in modern blended education this project fosters pedagogical collaboration professional learning communities and the exchange of experiences among regional partners. the collaborative effort supported by eu partners aims to tackle gaps in deepening coplanning and implementation. by aligning with the digital education action plan in the eu and adhering to international standards the bewbu project focuses on digital transformation and strategic partnerships in western balkan countries to elevate the overall pedagogical quality of higher education.
 university of mostar
 ministry of education science technology and innovation
 beyond social auditing  towards communicative empowerment and selfgovernance of factory workers and suppliers in the textile industry
 social pedagogy versus social work in a swedish context
 outside the system  life patterns of yong adults with intellectual disabilities
 social pedaogical practices in swedish welfare contexts
 on the outskirts of normality  young adults with disabilities their belonging and strategies
 common areas in group homes  arenas for different interests?
 jessica thorn
 big data processing and analysis parttime campus bad700
 the students are introduced to the main types of data analysis and analysis methods both theoretically and practically. importance of the data characteristics is emphasized as critical in selecting proper analysis methods and tools.
 the course focuses on the data processing flows comprised of the following steps
 iai600introduction to artificial intelligence and machine learning and
 pfa600programming for automation or the equivalent.
 fotograf andreas olsson aofoto
 vellore institute of technology university vit
 this project called biogas 2020 includes the establishment of a platform for biogas in the entire öksregion.
 the scope covers the entire value chain from substrates to enduse and a range of targeted information and communication activities development of models tools and pilots for technology business development planning and policies.
 main objectives
 the main objectives of the platform is to
 create an overarching vision and aim for the biogas development in scandinavia
 facilitate transnational and interregional cooperations pilots and tests.
 through transnational collaborations and actions develop new technology new tools instruments and methods that will increase the production and use of biogas
 exchange and transfer of knowledge models and methods for increased competence and dissemination of information and knowhow
 the aim is that the biogas platform will during the project period transform from establishment with many regional and local actors and networks to an operation phase for longterm function and organization. we will create a network and integrated cooperation which creates growth and jobs through innovation collaboration between rd public authorities and business actors. the purpose is that the experiences findings and results created by the project shall be the foundation for long term effects and improvements in the biogas value chain and feasibility. this will be monitored in relation to both result and activity indicators. the project consist of 5 work packages with a range of subtasks. the work packages are
 project coordination and management
 the biogas platform
 production and processes
 in addition to lead partner norwegian project owner and national coordinators each of the wp will have a leader which will function as coordinator of all included subtasks and actions. the wp leader will ensure and facilitate communication with other wp leaders and serve as channel to the platform for monitoring and coordination for optimal information dissemination and costefficiency in the implementation of the project.
 the project is considered to have a high level of transfer of experience cooperation and results over the borders within the öksregion. this is due to the high number of partners covering the entire area and types of actors in the value chain as well as the intense anchoring of the project amongst key actors and stakeholders carried out in conjunction with the prior projects and within the setting up of this proposal.
 the project contributes strongly to sustainable development within the öksregion and is considered to have a high impact on long term beyond the project life span.
 christophe lyphout
 staff member at division of industrial engineering.
 visiting professor in logistics and supply chain management.
 my google scholar profile
 confirmation of attendance erasmus
 learning agreement erasmus traineeship.docx
 learning agreement for studies outside
 learningagreementforerasmusstudies.pdf
 we have international students renting private studios in blåvingen apartments at lantmannavägen 100. here eidar offers 19 student apartments with proximity to both grocery stores green areas and good bus connections. it is 3km from university west.
 type of accommodation 17 studios that are 1 room and kitchenette of between 2837 square meters 2 studios that are 2 rooms and kitchenette of 42.5 square metersnumber of roomsstudio apartments 14 onebedroom apartments 61 shared apartments with 130 rooms in totaladdress lantmannavägen 100 trollhättandistance to university west 3 kmstudioapartment size private studio  2837 m2 2room apartments 42.5 m2shared common area with a stove and refigeratorfreezerfurnished yesrent private studio apartment 4200  6000 sek per monthincluded heating electricity water and broadband cable internet 100mbit.laundry room available on the first floor. some example impressions of studio apartmentsrooms at blåvingen
 bo helsing
 boards councils and committees
 university west has a number of boards councils and committees that can act as decisionmaking or advisory units.
 academic appointments board
 disciplinary board
 staff disciplinary board
 department boards department of health sciences department of engineering science department of social and behavioural studies school of business economics and it
 advisory
 safety committee
 work integrated learning board
 ict board
 subject board
 organisational development board
 council for strategic affairs on access and credit accounting
 council of sustainability advice
 a new unique programme in electric vehicle development aims to educate electrical engineers that can solve the challenges of the industry. by focusing on problem solving practical labs and industry contact the students will acquire skills that are highly sought after.
 the master in electric vehicle development is a oneyear programme aimed at electrical engineers. its built in collaboration with industry and focuses on the questions what challenges do the electric vehicle industry face today and how can they be solved?. therefore there is a very clear focus on how technology is applied in industry today. and after graduation the students will have skills that are highly sought after by industry.
 we talk a lot with companies and they are very positive about being involved in programme says boel ekergård senior lecturer and programme director at university west. we will have the industry involved in every course. for example through lectures company visits and project work with supervisors from industry.
 the trollhättan region and west sweden are home to many car and battery industries making it the perfect location for students within electric vehicle development.
 practical knowledge
 the students will actually produce solutions not only read about how to do it says boel ekergård. they will be in the lab a lot  its a very good way to learn to actually apply the knowledge.
 the master in electric vehicle development is a unique programme because of its large application and many practical elements. among other things the students will design electric motors develop control systems and work with emc problems.
 in an area like this where so much is happening there are so many different sections where new technical solutions are needed boel ekergård explains. we dont only need to improve current solutions we also need to come up with completely new solutions. to do that you must have a very deep knowledge. the students must actually understand what does the equation mean and what happens in the next step?. and thats where i think that labsessions are extremely valuable.
 an electrical driveline is a more sustainable solution than a traditional combustion engine. boel ekergård explains why.
 they have much higher efficiency. you go from an efficiency of 20 up to maybe 70 by switching to electric power. and you dont have any emissions when you drive she says.
 and for boel ekergård this is the biggest reason for her interest in this subject.
 i want to contribute to reducing our impact on this planet she explains. we have to reduce emissions and the automotive industry is basically responsible for 30 of the emissions in the world. so if we electrify the entire vehicle sector we have very good conditions for reducing emissions.
 master in electric vehicle development
 read more about the programme
 book a reading or writing tutorial.
 during a tutorial in reading we first talk about your reading. then we try different reading strategies on a text.
 the tutorial is one hour long. to book a reading tutorial send an email to the language resource centre.
 writing tutorial
 during a writing tutorial we offer
 a conversation about structure style and language
 guidance on how to continue working with your language skills on your own
 tips and advice on how to plan your writing and your studies
 we do not help with
 proofreading or editing services
 each writing tutorial session is one hour long. you can book 21 days in advance at the earliest and you can book a maximum of one tutorial every 14 days. you email your text in advance to the tutor who reads a maximum of 2 pages.
 how to book a tutorial
 you can book an appointment for a writing tutorial on our booking page. tutorials usually take place in teams or on campus. the available times are visible on the booking page 21 days in advance.
 before you get to the booking page you may need to log in with your username xxxx0000@student.hv.se and the same password as for canvas.
 when you have made your appointment you will receive a confirmation on the screen and a copy will be sent to the email address you have entered. there you can see which supervisor you will meet and which time you have chosen. in the confirmation email you will also find the link to the digital meeting in teams.
 book reservation will not be available after 4 june due to the closing and remodelling of the library 11 june  22 august.
 when the library is closed you will not be able to make new loans and your existing loans will be extended.
 there are many group study rooms at campus available for students and 6 of those are in the library.
 rules for booking
 you can only book up until two weeks ahead.
 you can only book four passes four hours per day and most twelve hours in two weeks.
 if the room is not used 15 min after the start of the booked time it will be available for other students.
 dont forget to cancel your reservation if you are not going to use the room.
 you book the rooms at schema.hv.se book rooms. to be able to unlock group rooms you need to validate the west card.
 to be able to unlock group rooms you need to validate the west card.
 these group study rooms can you book as a student
 these group rooms can be found under the todays group room
 in the ongoing discussion about ai artificial intelligence that is now heard in many contexts and especially about the ai tool chatgpt a brand new book ai och skolan only available in swedish yet has now been launched free for everyone to download.
 ai och skolan ai in the school by johan falk is a book for teachers who are interested in using the ai service chatgpt in their work. the book contains dozens of examples of how you can facilitate work get inspiration and create materials with the help of chatgpt.
 emphasizing the importance of using judgment in how and when chatgpt is used the book outlines four types of ai traps to watch out for language errors factual errors skewed perspectives or values and unreflective pedagogy.
 the last part of the book gives more perspective on ai school and the future.
 link for download
 breaking fences  fostering norm awerness through norm creativity in european health science education
 bridging work integrated learning practice to theory
 wace european iso at university west and dhbw heidenheim are happy to invite you to a european wil seminar
 why a seminar?
 this wace wil seminar focuses on dual training cooperative education and work integrated education programs. attending this first experience based seminar will provide you with the tools to better analyse and understand the wil practices in your institution and workplace. the word seminar means plant a seed and the best way of doing this is to start from the participants experiences and then to reflect on them from various theoretical perspectives. this of course means that there are some work needs to be done before attending the seminar.
 learning objectivesby the end of the seminar the aim is that you will be able to describe and understand the wil experience in a theoretical framework by utilizing articles case descriptions and group discussions.
 preparationreadings there will be some readings three articles that provides us with the necessary tools to analyze our wil practice. furthermore you will be asked to provide the seminar leader with some case descriptions that will provide us with material to the workshops. you will also be asked to make a short presentation of wil in a local and national context. three articles and instructions regarding case descriptions will be distributed to you after your registration.
 time an estimation of time needed to read prepare cases and participate at the seminar will be approximately 2025 hours.
 certificate of completion on completion of the module participants will receive a certificate of completion. this will be awarded to participants who complete all the required tasksactivities.
 date and timesthe seminar starts at 11 am on tuesday april 19 2016 and conclude at 15 pm on wednesday april 20 2016.
 staff member at division of educational support and development.
 i work with inhouse training and support functions for teachers and administrative staff related to digital tools recordings emeetings and the learning platform canvas. i am the system manager for canvas. i am called bitte.
 brogren industries journey from traditional mechanical workshop to aircraft industry supplier
 the brogren industries journey from traditional mechanical workshop to aircraft industry supplier
 university west is a valuable partner to us. cooperation opens doors to new competence new contacts and new business opportunities. we used to be a relatively anonymous mechanical workshop now we are a supplier of advanced components to the aircraft industry says fredrik olofsson rd manager at brogren industries.
 we wanted to approach the aircraft industry and thus we needed to expand our competence on processes and laser welding simulation tells fredrik olofsson. in this work university west has given us important support among other things they have helped us to seek funding for our educational efforts.
 approved supplier to the aircraft industry
 to us this journey has been highly developing explains fredrik olofsson. after some years of intense learning we qualified as suppliers to the aircraft industry in 2012.
 today we are skilled to manage the entire processes of manufacturing aircraft engine components. we are one of only a few companies in sweden that have obtained as9100 certification. this means that we meet the high quality standards set by the aircraft industry.
 the projects provide us with a valuable network that can lead to new cooperation. we also get opportunities to try out manufacturing steps using the advanced machinery at ptc. the short distance between älvängen and trollhättan is of course an advantage.
 siemens is the largest client
 brogren industries was founded in 1965 in älvängen and for many years the company was a traditional mechanical workshop with turning and cutting as specialties. today the 100 employees work within three business areas aerospace gas turbines and parts. they have special laser welding and tigwelding skills where they principally use hardworked materials in combination with complex geometric demands and quality standards. the largest client is siemens. other clients are gkn aerospace saab and parker hannifin.
 valuable learning process
 the interest for new technology and inservice training permeates the entire organization. company employees receive current inservice training in cooperation with university west. in parallel students are invited to brogren industries to obtain practical experience and to write papers. this serves the purposes of both spreading knowledge and finding new coworkers.
 having to continuously face new challenges is a valuable learning process for our employees. at this point we are above all monitoring development within additive manufacturing to see what it may imply for us. it is important for us to stay at the forefront in that field.
 bubbles create better sound environments in open offices
 over the past 20 years most indoor work spaces have transitioned from individual offices where one could close the door to open work spaces where many share the same space. a new doctoral thesis from the university west examines whether the increasingly poor sound environment can be made more pleasant through innovative sound design.
 prototype with background sound
 if we think differently im convinced that we shouldnt just focus on removing sound. we need to use sound as a design element but it must be pleasant and a sound you dont really notice which halfprotects you from the surroundings. it shouldnt be entirely isolating like headphones but you should be able to participate in conversations if you want to. otherwise we lose the point of open office environments says martin.
 martin emphasizes that the prototypes task is not about completely enclosing or shutting out. it should also not play music through the speakers. instead it should be a sound that is pleasant but not something you actively listen to something not too interesting but still intriguing enough not to get tired of. this allows you to decide whether you want to participate in colleagues conversations or be by yourself. the sound bubble does not shut out everything but is transparent.
 it should be like working in a café. when you find your flow in such an environment its because you dont have to focus on other guests conversations. there are only pleasant nonessential sounds around you. in short we give the user power. in todays workplaces we are imposed sound environments we have no control over. with a solution like this the user can choose their own sound environment.
 pleasant melodic sounds with resonance
 the most important result i found was that we need other ways to look at sound more than just dampening them and that when people are given the opportunity to choose they are active users of the sound environment. this means we want to make the sound environment pleasant and meaningful not completely silent. weve taken the idea that it must be quiet too far. how we perceive a sound environment cannot solely be measured in decibels says martin.
 the thesis may be finished but martin has only just begun. now hes curious about what kind of sounds can be used in school environments to help children with concentration difficulties.
 it would be exciting to see what we can design for them and look at ways to mask the sound from other students in the classroom. thats something im looking forward to concludes martin.
 for the thesis space in the space  designing sound environments for the shared indoor workspace
 contact martin ljungdahl eriksson thirdparty doctoral student in informatics specializing in workintegrated learning university west  46 76536 22 17 martin.ljungdahleriksson@hv.se
 are you a student at university west and want to get to know people from all over the world improve your rusty language skills and gain new experiences and friendships? then you should become a buddy for an international student next semester
 the idea behind the buddy upprogramme is to create new friendships by connecting international students with domestic students. your role as a buddy will be to help your international friend get into the community here at university west and in trollhättan more generally. maybe youll get to answer a few questions about daily life in sweden meet up with your buddy for a stroll or show them around the city center.
 important here nothing must everything can just get to know each other and see where it leads you.
 all you need to do to join the buddy upprogramme and become a buddy for an international student is to fill out the form below.
 please share this information with your friends
 the buddy upprogramme is run by the international student council isc in cooperation with university wests international office.
 join the buddy up programme fill out the form below to join the buddy up programme and become a buddy for an international student. within a couple of weeks youll be contacted by someone who works with the buddy up programme or your new buddy
 preferred languages to speak with your buddy
 spanish
 french
 if other please specify
 business finance and it
 elevate your career prospects with dynamic programmes in business finance and it. immerse yourself in an innovative academic environment where youll gain the knowledge and skills to excel in the world of commerce logistics and technology.
 this masters programme offers the quantitative and theoretical tools required for a successful career as a financial analyst.
 international business
 in this masters programme youll build the knowledge and skills needed to help a business operate effectively in a complex and dynamic global business environment.
 this oneyear masters programme offers a choice of three areas of specialisation and is built around the most pressing needs of professionals in the it field.
 operations and supply chain management
 this masters programme gives insights into the opportunities and challenges of information technology and an understanding of logistics and operations management.
 bachelor degree 180 ects with 90 ects in the major subject area of business administration and the courses international marketing 75 he credits imd900 and international management 75 he credits ifd900 or equivalent.
 as a result of the ongoing climate transition extensive electrification is underway to reduce the use of fossil fuels where the electrification of both vehicles and industry will play an important role.
 this creates new challenges for the industry to adapt to new technology and adapt existing systems to the new conditions. for the automotive industry the driveline is to be electrified which requires knowledge of among other things battery systems power electronics measurement systems control systems electromagnetic compatibility and electric motors as well as all conditions around that change.
 business trips and commuting
 the university has set a goal to keep business travel as sustainable as possible since reduced impact on the climate is an important aspect.
 objective by 2045 university west will have gradually reduced its impact on the climate created through business travel to as close to zero as possible whereby remaining carbon dioxide emissions are compensated through negative emissions in other areas such as through co2 storage and carbon sinks.
 we only travel when we have to
 a business trip is not an end in itself rather it is a way of reaching another goal and the effect on the climate just like the price must always be weighed in. travelfree meetings should be chosen when possible and university west will work with others to render the academic meeting culture more flexible. we will offer digital participation at our own events in addition to developing the flexibility of our campus programmes to a degree that did not exist before the covid19 pandemic.
 when we have to travel we do it in a climatesmart fashion
 the impact on the climate will be accounted for in our booking system to make possible the choice of a climatesmart trip. train travel should be used for all trips under 500 km for domestic travel as well as when possible for longer international trips. when we fly it should be done in the most climatesmart way possible for example one should choose an airline that has efficient planes that take biofuel and try to avoid stopovers. systems for internal carbon emission trading will be introduced.
 the university works together with property owners and the city of trollhättan to promote climatesmart travel to and from our campus.
 reconstructing parenthood in a new context  pantea rinnemaa  helena korp.pdf
 call for paperspdf call for papers
 program book of abstracts och keynotespdf programpdf book of abstracts
 barnombudsmannenthe ombudsman for children monitors the implementation and interpretation of the un convention on the rights of the child crc in swedens municipalities county regions and government agencies.
 barnombudsmannenthe ombudsman for children  guarding and voicing childrenss rights and interests
 the ombudsman advocates for children and raises public awareness on childrens rights. they provide mechanisms for meaningful participation of children and youth in our work including through interviews focus groups polls and meetings. children are experts on their situation and the ombudsman aim to amplify their voices. in this presentation elisabeth dahlin gives her view of the state of art almost two years after the crc was made a law in sweden. what positive changes have been observed and what gaps and challenges?
 save the children sweden migration thematic expertmember of eu commission expert group on migration asylum and integration
 protection beyond reach state of play of refugee and migrant childrens rights in europe
 adnan is a refugee from syria and the initiator of the support group network sgn a refugee led organization in sweden. he is a thematic adviser for region västra götaland for the regional development strategy 2020 to 2030 and a member of the eu commission expert group on migration asylum and integration.
 it is six years to the day since alan kurdi lost his life just off the turkish coast becoming a tragic symbol of the refugee crisis as they call it. european leaders were among the first to say never again but ever since they have only made routes more difficult and dangerous for refugees and migrants and the eu responded with increasingly restrictive and dangerous measures.
 what is the state of play of refugee and migrant childrens rights in europe and what has happened since 2015? how about the migration key themes protection at europes outer borders immigration detention access to asylum and residency?
 the centre of child and youth studies conference 2021 november 4th5th the convention on the rights of the child
 program book of abstracts and keynotespdf programpdf book of abstracts
 professor in social work
 presentationsformer
 tidigare konferenser  previous conferences
 mer information  more information
 when pupils dont do what theyre told and why sometimes this can be good
 book of abstracts
 ladda ner book of abstracts här
 practicing refusal of extremist public discourses
 growing up on the run. state of play on the ukrainian crisis and challenges facing refugee children from around the world seeking protection in europe.
 keynotes presentations and book of abstracts
 your userid and password are valuable and you should make sure to handle them carefully. if you suspect that your password might have fallen into the wrong hands you should change it immediately. remember that you are personally responsible for what happens when the universitys systems are accessed from your userid.
 avoid using your university password for other purposes.
 to change your password andor pin code go to the system my account choose edit.
 to change your password click on the tab change university west password.
 to change the pin code go to my info private information.
 please note it can take up to 30 minutes before your password has been changed on all systems.
 my account
 my account edit
 to my account edit
 cmas is changing the way automation systems are developed and run. cmas allows each resource component and product to act as an autonomous agent equipped with local knowledge and logic. this reduces the need for traditional plc and robot programming.
 instead with cmas you design a plug  produce system that makes it easy to adapt fast to changes in production demands. this approach enables mobility and reusability across stations ensuring your production system remains agile and responsive to evolving demands.
 industrial robot reuse an industrial robot is to be moved and reused in a new robot cell. this would typically require extensive time for programming and preparation. using cmas and plug  produce this can be done in minutes. this is because hardware and logic are standardized and do not contain any information about the local manufacturing system.
 download cmas and test it on a simulated manufacturing system that is based on plug  produce.
 professor                        professor i automation
 attend a workshop in our various digital tools and methods.
 how to participate in a workshop?
 we offer workshops in english on demand. read more about our workshops.
 you can also subscribe to our newsletter to receive immediate notification of the latest activities.
 in common we have an interest in workintegrated learning based on the collaboration and integration between higher education and working life. within this field of knowledge there are educational challenges stacking in various forms between higher education and working life.
 take the opportunity to network and meet people from all over the world with a special interest in wil
 your can choose to present in english swedish norwegian or danish.
 please do not forget to mark your presentation with your name organisation and your email. the contribution should be written and submitted as a word file. in subject write call for papers vilär 2021 and send to kristina.johansson@hv.se.  a maximum of 300 words exkl. references
 examples of areas to contribute to
 the organisation of wil
 educational challenges with supervision and examination of the practicepraxis dimension of wil
 progression in wil
 educational modelsdesigns for evaluation and quality assurance
 learning in the intersection of academia and worklife
 interprofessional learning
 criterias for submission
 relevance for the conference
 the potential of supporting the development of wil within and outside of the university
 clear implications and reflective reasoningargumentation
 all contributions will be reviewed by two experts in the field.
 session format
 send in your abstract in a maximum of 300 words exkl. references in english swedish norwegian or danish. last date for call for abstracts extented time for submission of abstract til the 8th of november.
 please mark if your contribution is
 oral presentation 30 minutes 20 minutes talk and 10 minutes to questions
 interactive session 30 minutes 510 minutes introduction and 2025 minutes in workshop or dialogue with the audience
 manuscript 30 minutes 25 minutes discussion with an opponent that read and discuss your manuscript 5 minutes for questions
 presentation in english swedish norwegian or danish.
 practical information
 the contributions will be grouped into the parallel sessions according to the theme and the wished session format. in some cases the program committee can ask the participants to present their contribution in a different category then the initially wanted one.
 your contribution can be held in english swedish norwegian or danish. do not forget to mark your presentation with your name organisation and your email. the contribution shall be submitted in a word file and note maximum 300 words including references.
 under subject write call for papers vilär 2021 and send to kristina.johansson@hv.se
 the university west campus is located in the heart of trollhättan easily accessible with culture trade and beautiful walks around the canal as part of the environment.
 the student environment is vibrant there are a variety of students with different backgrounds student unions and opportunities for collaboration with working life. you are met by an inspiring and practical study environment with plenty of meeting and study places  the best creative and stimulating conditions to develop.
 the universitys servicecenter provides students staff and visitors with service and support.
 the library
 the library has print and online collections that encompass books ebooks electronic journals newspapers multimedia and a range of other eresources such as marketing reports. the modern library area is a natural meeting point and workplace on the campus and serves as a qualified information center for students and staff at the university. the library staff can assist you on how to use and find information on how to use library resources and to provide study spaces to suit your needs.
 at the library you will find
 more than 180 study places in the library
 access to more than 70 computer study places
 sections with seating for study or just relaxation
 multifunctional printers for printing and copying
 6 group study rooms including 4 with computers
 quiet reading room with 30 seats
 cogito a flexible study area with moveable furniture and a smart screen
 study landscapes and group rooms
 the campus has four study landscapes which are in close proximity of the professors offices to increase contact between you and those who work at the university. in the study landscape you will find a computer room locker rooms group rooms and a student kitchen with seating. in the kitchenettes you can store and heat your own food.
 apart from the library and study landscapes you will find group rooms spread throughout the building.
 on campus there is a student bookstore where you can buy the course literature you need if you couldnt borrow it at the library. in the bookstore there are also used books for sale. the student bookstore is located on the second floor of the dhouse.
 student health services
 our student health services  help you stay healthy  emotionally mentally and physically  so you can make the most of your time at the university west.
 study counselling
 university wests study counsellors can help you with study related questions  such as general questions about higher education or questions about our universitys programmes or study choices.
 the creative centre is a gathering place where students can test and develop creative elements within their education. in the creative centre lounge there are ongoing exhibitions of student work and projects and here you can sit down and enjoy the exhibitions.
 at the media centre you can borrow equipment for working with various creative projects within the framework of our courses and programmes.
 on campus there is restaurant västan which serves lunch and sells refreshments. the student café serves light lunches and salads as well as homebaked cakes so called fika in sweden.
 find your way on campus
 a  student unionb  gregarts student book storec  student health servicesd  entré aile  main entrance restaurant västan libraryf  stråket entrance floor albertsalen
 g  servicecenter study and career councelling admissions office degree certification clinical learning centre.
 h  computer rooms and group study facilities. creative centre.
 i j  study area ishavet and vita havet with kitchenettes computer rooms lockers and group study facilities. study area medelhavet with computer room lockers and quiet study room.
 k  footbridgex  assembling point in case of fire.
 production technology center ptc
 campus and real estate issues
 the universitys goal is to create a green and sustainable campus where there are many green areas and where the campus is sustainable in terms of our consumption and production of energy as well as prudent innovative resource and material usage campus plan 2030.
 our focus on reducing the impact we have on the climate is to reduce our consumption of energy and reduce our impact on the climate when refurbishing and constructing new buildings.
 objective the universitys consumption of energy will be climate neutral by 2030 and reduced by at least 30 per cent per square meter and employee by 2045 in a base year analysis.
 to achieve this goal the university together with the proprietor will work on energy optimisation in the existing buildings and when refurbishing and constructing new buildings make demands for renewable energy and low energy consumption when signing procurement contracts gradually replace electric equipment with the highest energy efficiency class based on a lifecycle perspective and work on improving communication as a way of achieving changes in behaviour that will save energy.
 objective the universitys refurbishment and new construction projects will be climate neutral by 2045 and the buildings constructed up until then will be of the highest environmental standard.
 refurbishing existing buildings and constructing new ones is not always included in climatesmart planning that is done for the higher education sector but we know that in the life cycle of a building emissions are greatest during the construction process. this is why it is important that we work with the proprietor to reduce our carbon footprint in this phase. furthermore it is important that a new building have a high environmental standard since that reduces the impact on the environment and our carbon footprint made by our operations in the buildings such as the consumption of energy. a sustainable approach to building construction is therefore to pay more rather than try to save money during the process of construction since it is more expensive and more harmful to the environment to modify the building afterwards. this is an appropriate strategy for reviewing our model of financing refurbishment and new construction and ensuring that specific funding has been earmarked for incurring a relatively large expense today as a way of avoiding an even larger economicecological cost in the future.
 time for campus to develop
 campus plan 2030 describes university wests longterm ambition and points out the direction for development for the next ten years.
 student information
 read about whats happening on campus
 the campus plan was decided by the universitys board in december 2019 and is a result of collaboration between university west the student union at university west the city of trollhättan kraftstaden real estate company and the municipal housing company eidar. the campus development is based on collaboration.
 based on the campus plan the purpose is to create an environment where academia and working life meet and where students staff collaboration partners and the public want to be.the campus plan shows opportunities for how the campus area can be integrated with the city center and is in line with the city of trollhättans ambitions to develop the city center.
 main entrance with indoor square and restaurant
 new detailed plan for the campus area
 student housing on campus
 learning environment
 work and meeting places on campus
 collaboration and meeting places on campus
 collaboration and meeting places at ptc
 decoration and visibility on campus
 here you find campus plan 2030 exernal website
 see the film campus plan 2030
 the 9 strategies of the campus plan
 the strategies of the campus plan form the basis for the development of the area and outline the measures required in order to achieve the campus vision and impact targets.
 to create inspiring and productive collaborative environments on campus.
 to create flexible creative learning areas  in physical and digital environments.
 to develop attractive flexible workspaces and meeting places.
 to make the campus inviting and easy to navigate.
 to build accommodation on campus.
 to create greener environments  inside and out.
 to create space for activities amenities and social interaction.
 to develop a sustainable campus.
 to provide sustainable connections and parking facilities
 impact targets
 further description
 green  sustainable campus
 steering group management team universitys board of directorsoperational steering group university director deputy university director head of hr head of communications
 main entrance with indoor square and restaurantproject leader thomaz birgerson
 new local plan for the campus areaproject leader thomaz birgerson
 workspaces and meeting places on campusproject leader sandra öhrström
 collaboration and meeting places at campusproject leader andréas sülau
 collaboration and meeting places at ptcproject leader lennart malmsköld
 interior design and visualizationproject leader stefan kudryk
 project resources fredrik wänergård process support anna tanderud communication officer anna nordgren meijer controller
 what is a campus?
 the term campus is a broad concept for the entire universitys operations. it accommodates the physical place with its environment and buildings as well as the business the life and the surrounding service created in the area.
 reuse in the campus development
 agenda 2030 describes global goals for sustainable development and should be an obvious guiding star in the continued work to develop the campus. therefore our starting point when we rebuild on campus is to reuse as much as possible.
 reduce the climate impact
 the academic world has a central role in the work to counteract the negative climate changes. the socalled klimatramverket was created at the initiative of universities with the ambition to clearly contribute to the climate transition in line with societys national and international commitments.
 together with 35 other universities we have committed to reducing our negative climate impact so that we are in line with the 1.5 degree target i.e. a halving by 2030 and net zero emissions by 2045.
 what happens to furniture that will not be used in the new environments as we continue to rebuild?
 service and it have inventoried all the furniture with the aim of being able to reuse as much as possible.
 we will not be able to use some furniture because they are worn out or because they do not fit in size in the new environments.
 we try to sell the furniture that is not worn out via  kammarkollegiet agreement for reuse.
 what cannot be sold will be sent for recycling but we hope that it will not be that much.
 university director                        university director
 operations developer
 can digital tools help create a healthier working life?
 this is a novel approach to identifying and developing innovative working methods and human resource activities that can promote sustainable health at work says professor of informatics ann svensson. our focus is on developing digital solutions that meet these needs. the idea is to incorporate healthpromoting activities into working life in a flexible way.
 increasingly tight schedules and higher demands for results and productivity have led to a deterioration in employee health. this is something that employers within industry and several other fastgrowing sectors have noticed in recent years.
 offering different types of activities
 we start by mapping the health situation at companies. the next step involves employees being offered a number of activities that promote good health in different ways. these could be personalised activities or group exercises such as yoga walking lectures on health and healthy eating.
 the activities will be available to employees via a digital tool on their mobile phones. depending on how active the employees are there will be various rewards such as free lunches water bottles and towels. the companies will continuously monitor whether the efforts have resulted in positive effects on employee health and on the organisations finances and sustainability.
 our ambition is to create a tool that inspires healthpromoting activities and is perceived as a positive element in this work.
 can solar cell receivers be made more efficient with additive manufacturing?
 this is an exciting project in which our expertise in weldingbased additive manufacturing and hightemperature materials can hopefully benefit the transition to renewable energy says professor of material science joel andersson.
 the energy industrys interest in developing more efficient carbonfree energy sources is growing rapidly. solar and wind energy are already used on a large scale for electricity generation but fossil fuels dominate heavily in industrial process heat production. thermal solar power is one of the few promising alternatives for producing renewable energy to meet industrys need for process heating.
 in simple terms thermal solar power can be described as a solar energy system where sunlight is captured by multiple mirrors and the solar energy is concentrated using a receiver similar to a satellite dish explains professor andersson. in this project we at university west will try to manufacture the dish using weldingbased additive manufacturing with different hightemperature materials.
 we hope that additive manufacturing for this application can bring new opportunities for tailoring more efficient solar energy systems.
 more about the project
 more about tewer engineerings solar installations
 unfortunately we no longer offer this specific programme.
 but we offer many other interesting programmes
 canvas student  google play
 canvas student  app store
 what are the browser and computer requirements for instructure products?
 new user role  examinator examiner
 to facilitate for students and to clarify responsibilities the examiner role has been created. the examiner role is based on the course leader role and has similar permissions. if the course leader and examiner roles are held by the same person they will automatically only have the course leader role in canvas. if its necessary to clarify that the person is also an examiner this must be manually added in the course.
 combined reading courses  new course codes
 courses with different course codes that are read together will now have a common course code. for example if the courses gla100 and bva100 are combined the common course code will be _ _a100 where the common letter and number combinations are retained and the noncommon characters are replaced with underscores. each course can be given a nickname if desired which can be done in canvas dashboard on the course cards submenu 3 dots in the upper right corner.
 new features in canvas courses
 course plans and literature lists now have separate headings in the course information module. this is aimed at increasing clarity particularly for combined reading courses that have multiple course plans and reading lists.
 discussions and announcements have been redesigned. read more about the changes here.
 new analytics a new analytics tool to measure student activity in courses has now been installed. watch a demonstration video about new analytics here.
 the implementation of canvass new quiz tool new quizzes will begin in the spring. more information about this will be provided in the coming weeks.
 web services
 canvas  learning management system
 canvas is used as an educational tool for conducting courses.
 access to your course
 the canvas app
 how do i change the language?
 how do i join a zoom emeeting in a course?
 copyright and copy protection
 when you register for your course you automatically get access to the course in canvas. how to register for a course. the canvas course will be published at the earliest four weeks before the course starts.
 for canvas there is a great app called canvas student.the app should be seen as a complement to the computer when you are studying. functionality is limited in the app. functionality may also vary between the android app and the ios app.
 canvas app  google play
 in the calendar you will find your schedule but also tutoring times reminders about exam registration and events that you can enter yourself. here is an example of what the calendar might look like
 when you change the language in the settings using a web browser it also changes in the app.
 go to your account konto
 getting started with canvas
 how do i use the dashboard?
 how do i use the inbox?
 how do i manage my canvas notification settings?
 how do i sign up for a scheduler appointment in the calendar?
 how do i submit an online assignment?
 how do i view assignment comments from my instructor?
 how do i view rubric results for my assignment?
 how do i join a group?
 how do i submit a peer review to an assignment?
 posting material in canvas that is protected by copyright means dissemination and requires the consent of the copyright holder. this also applies when canvas restricts access to a group of students through passwords. this means for example that you may not scan in and distribute copyrightprotected material via canvas. permission is also required for distribution in a small group and if the material is on passwordprotected pages.
 compit  capability and performance enhancing technologies of machining systems
 a direct consequence of the project will be that energy and material efficiency is achieved contributing to weight reduction of machined parts. weight reduction gives vehicle manufacturers significant benefits in terms of better fuel economy emissions performance and thus reduced energy consumption.
 the ultimate objectives of these developments are both to increase the throughput of existing production lines and enable the industry to machine new high strength materials.  these form the basis of the next generation high performance automotive vehicles.
 financial support for the department for social and behavioral studies ios
 produce financial material to support the longterm planning of the department regarding
 jointly with academic partner compile the student forecast of the department
 externaly funded education
 carl tonander
 why did you apply to us at university west and master in electromechanical vehicles?
 why did you apply to this programme?
 since i was a child ive been really interested in cars. nowadays the automotive industry is moving forward to electrification. by studying this program i feel that i can acquire more knowledge about the industry.
 the program has been made in contact with the automotive industry and that was the key factor to choose this program. i believe sweden is the best place to develop my career as a mechanical engineer in the automotive industry.
 is it what you thought it should be?
 i am really surprised about the education works in sweden. the organization is different compared to spanish education. in my case i have class only twothree days a week and courses last only for two months after that we start new courses. i was used to have class every day and courses last six months.
 the organization is also less tight and schedule is not completely defined until a few weeks before the date. in my case it was an issue at the beginning but nowadays i am used to this organization. i love that we have less number of courses and more free time to do different activities outside the university.
 what is the most exciting you have done during the studies?
 as i said before one of the attractions of studying in sweden is the partnership between the university and the professional world. one day we went to nevs swedish company known before as saab and there we spent the day doing different test and talking with some engineers. it was really interesting and motivating to meet some people which are working in the industry in some positions where i wish to work some day.
 can you describe the environmentculture at the university?
 university west is just amazing. the first time that i walked thought campus i was amazed by how new all the facilities was. people working there are really friendly and they are more than happy to help you. everybody speaks english so it is not a problem not to speak swedish to study here.
 daily life at university it is really good. it is a small university so you can see people every time everywhere and this fact encourage people to go to university and keep studying.
 teachers are close and it is really easy to talk to them and ask as many questions as you want. we were told since the first day that there is no barrier between teachers and students and it helps the student to feel more comfortable to talk to them.
 before coming here i was worried about how my life would be like in a small city like trollhattan. i am used to live in a big city as madrid and the change is noticeable. but i am quite happy with this city. everything is closer and it takes about  510 minutes by bike to get to diffrent places such as the supermarket university or the gym.
 i live surrounded by international students and its a really good environment we help each other and it is really nice to share my days with people that have the same lifestyle as i do.
 the only negative side of living in trollhattan is the time that it takes to arrive to the airport. the closest is in gothenburg and it is up to two hours of trip that increases considerably the time of your trip.
 most of the time i tried to spend my time with my friends the majority of them are internationals students like me. i tried to make as many plans as possible to be busy during the days regardless if its dark outside or not.
 i try to go to the gym and make some sport every day. after that i go to the relax area the best part of the gym it is crazy how are the gyms here and the facilities that they have.
 during the weekends my friends and i try different plans such as visiting some cities that are nearby or even some other countries like denmark or norway and of course the last but not the least i like to go partying when possible.
 i am not 100 sure about what will happen in my life when the master finishes but i am sure that i want to be working in the automotive industry. the place where i will hopefully work is still unknown i guess wherever i have an offer.
 first of all i want to experience the winter here in sweden and see if at the end of this experience i have got used to the weather and local customs to live here the following years.
 another option is to try to find some graduate programs in the biggest car companies that are settled around europe.
 and also the option of coming back home is always on the table but i am feeling closer to be living abroad and making international experience.
 how do you think the studies here at university west and your programme can help you to reach your goals?
 studying a master abroad is an important step in my professional education and it is really well seen in a cv. not only for what you learn in the program but also for all the knowledge that you acquire living by yourself in a different country with different culture.
 more specifically in my case i think that studying a master here in sweden in electromechanical vehicles will open many doors in the automotive industry that will help to achieve my goal working as an engineer in a big automotive company.
 carolin andersson
 support for the universitys teachers in the areas of ict pedagogy digital tools canvas and hv play.
 carpenters try building houses with ar glasses
 doctoral student nicole tobiskovà runs a project in which ar glasses are tried by operators building wooden trusses.
 this is a student project where students have been working with our industrial partner for almost six months to create a solution that will support operators in their assembling work says nicole tobiskovà.
 one of the wooden truss operators who has tried installing with ar glasses is tony ringqvist
 you get a clearer picture of what the wooden truss looks like and where the plinths end up. you can control it directly with your bare hands much more smoothly.
 more about the project tillverka i trä
 catharina cronholm
 hrspecialist
 catharina jonsson
 catharine walker bergström
 narrative ethics and intuition of the infinite  e. l. doctorows gnostic hope for the postmodern era
 catharine bergström walker
 cathrine hassel
 implementation of a new working method in psychiatric care
 the process of implementing a new working method  a project towards change in a swedish psychiatric clinic
 a new working method in psychiatric care  the impact of implementation
 when competence and confidence are at odds  a crosscountry examination of the dunningkruger effect
 motivational practice  insights from the classroom
 motivational strategies and the reframing of english  activity design and challenges for teachers in contexts of extensive extramural encounters
 alastair henry helena korp anna sundqvist cecilia thorsen
 differences in english teachers approaches to pupils outofschool english encounters in relation to school and pupil demographic factors
 helena korp alastair henry pia sundqvist cecilia thorsen
 teachers grading assignment and the predictive validity of normreferenced grades
 cecilia thorsen christina cliffordson
 dimensionality and predictive validity of school grades  the relative influence of cognitive and socialbehavioral aspects
 dimensions of normreferenced compulsory school grades and their relative importance for the prediction of upper secondary school grades
 the importance of cognitive and noncognitive factors for the predictive validity of grades.
 a modeling approach to identify academically resilient students  evidence from pirls 2016
 the mechanisms of interest and perseverance in predicting achievement among academically resilient and nonresilient students  evidence from swedish longitudinal data.
 the motisse project
 teacherstudent relationships and l2 motivation
 the ideal multilingual self  validity influences on motivation and role in a multilingual education
 individual development plans in the swedish comprehensive school  supporting high quality learning and equity or rote learning and social reproduction?
 effects of gf and gc on the development of knowledge and skills
 cecilia thorsen christina cliffordson janeric gustafsson
 christina cliffordson janeric gustafsson alli klapp cecilia thorsen
 the influence of fluid and crystallized intelligence on the development of knowledge and skills
 cecilia thorsen janeric gustafsson christina cliffordson
 teachers grade assignment and the predictive validity of criterionreferenced grades.
 therese rådén cecilia thorsen
 forthcoming aijmer rydsjö celia.  we do no harm we say what we want and we get paid for it academic work and dignity in stoner by john williams. exploring work in english studies a practicebased engagement edited by alistair henry and åke persson palgrave macmillan 2021.
 forthcoming aijmer rydsjö celia and åke persson. afterword working to take english studies into the world. exploring work in english studies a practicebased engagement edited by alistair henry and åke persson palgrave macmillan 2021.
 aijmer rydsjö celia and annkatrin jonsson. making it news money and marketing in expatriate modernist little magazines in europe. european journal of periodical studies. vol 1 no1 2016 pp. 7190.
 aijmer rydsjö celia and annkatrin jonsson. exiles in print modernism and little magazines in paris 19211939. peter lang 2016.
 aijmer rydsjö celia and annkatrin jonsson. published by us written by us read by us little magazine networks. global review a biannual special topics journal  archives  networks of modernism edited by james gifford james clawson and fiona tomkinson  vol.1 no.1 2013 pp. 3967.
 aijmer rydsjö celia and annkatrin jonsson. transition and internationalism as praxis. transnationality internationalism and nationhood european avantgarde in the first half of the twentieth century. groningen studies on cultural change 48 edited by hubert van den berg and lydia gluchowska peeters 2013.
 aijmer rydsjö celia and annkatrin jonsson. an addition to the bibliography of virginia woolf the first translation into french. notes and queries vol. 58 no. 4 2011 pp. 585586.
 aijmer rydsjö celia and annkatrin jonsson. an addition to the bibliography of virginia woolf early translation into french. notes and queries vol. 58 no. 4 2011 p. 586.
 aijmer celia and gert buelens. henry james and senses of the past. palgrave advances in henry james studies edited by peter rawlings. palgrave macmillan 2007.
 aijmer celia. houses of fiction henry james and the art of homelessness. gothenburg studies in english 2003.
 contact centre for activity theoryupcoming eventsprevious eventspublicationsrecent chat dissertations at uw
 centre for activity theory cat
 applications of activity theory
 activity theory has been applied in fields and disciplines as diverse as education organizational sociology humancomputer interaction computersupported cooperative work hospital administration writing studies and entrepreneurship and management. most recently across the world activity theory has been applied to largescale societal challenges such as homelessness social and environmental justice and climate change.
 activity theory and work integrated learning
 because of its focus on social dynamics within and across scenes of collective labor activity theory has often been applied in studies of work integrated learning wil the overall profile of university west.
 director dr maria spante uw information systems and work integrated learningcodirector dr annalisa sannino tampere university and uw educationcodirector dr monika hattinger information systems contact person for datis developing activity theory in information systems
 dr.inger erikssonschool of humanities education and social sciences
 dr. katsuhiro yamazumiprofessor of education kansai university
 dr. aydin balinterim faculty director global engagement officeprofessor rehabilitation psychology and special educationuniversity of wisconsinmadison
 dr. stan karanasiosuniversity of queensland business school business information systemsthe university of queensland
 activity theory is short for cultural historical activity theory  a framework that originated as a monist materialist and dialectical psychology grounded in the works of vygotsky and leontiev.
 over the years it has been applied to organizations and larger social systems to better understand how people collectively learn investigate solve problems and deliberate over desired futures.
 activity theory has been applied in fields and disciplines as diverse as education organizational sociology humancomputer interaction computersupported cooperative work hospital administration writing studies and entrepreneurship and management.
 most recently across the world activity theory has been applied to largescale societal challenges such as homelessness social and environmental justice and climate change.
 bureau de change laboratory pubpub.org
 inauguration of the centre 2021
 university west inaugurated the centre for activity theory in august 2021.
 there is a great international interest in activity theory. the model is closely linked to workintegrated learning so the centre can contribute to make the universitys work in that field visible says kristina johansson associate professor in education with specialization in work integrated learning.
 readmore in the news article
 conferences and webinars
 publications applying activity theory to work integrated learning wil.
 recent chat dissertations at uw
 centres in university west
 at university west there are a number of center formations with the aim of gathering activities of a similar nature under a common roof and thus create conditions for integration within the university and with the surrounding society.
 the universitys center formations
 center for sustainability
 read more about center för sustainability in swedish
 university wests center for health promotion and salutogenesis
 read more about center for health promotion and salutogenesis.
 other meeting places
 forum for school and welfare
 the cisco academy is a leading institute for professionals in advanced network technology in western sweden.
 university west is the base for catc scandinavia cisco academy training center which includes a training center and a support center.
 read more about the cisco academy
 8 mars 2023international womens day woman life freedom här
 17 may 2023international day against homophobia biphobia and transphobia
 5 june 2023world environment day a reflection on environmental justice and the need for alliances in the global south
 thomas pederson
 upcoming conferences
 the 12th iuhpe european conference on health promotion will be held on june 1718 2024 immediately followed by the 7th international conference on salutogenesis june 1920 in lodz poland.
 why should you come to lodz in june 2024?
 there are several annual ceremonies at university west.
 graduation bachelors programme
 at the end of every semester there is a graduation ceremony for all bachelor programme students at university west. the ceremony is a festive ending of the time at university west. the graduation ceremonies is usually held in the end of the  semester in the middle of january or in the beginning of june.graduation bachelors programme
 every year there is a graduation ceremony for students who has finished their master programmes at university west. the ceremony is filled with speeches and music and ends with a mingle with appetizers. the ceremony is usually held in the end of the spring semester in the end of may or beginning of june.graduation masters programme
 every other year university west celebrates academic festivities with an inauguration of full professors and conferment of phds. the next ceremony will be held in november 2022. take a glimpse from the recent ceremony october 2021 in the film below
 information on how to download different types of certificates from ladok. click on the headings to view pictures.
 1. go to  select ladok  for students
 log in by clicking access through your institution
 log in by entering your username for example student001 and password
 3. select transcripts and certificates in the menu to the right and click create
 4. choose which certificate you want to create
 5. the certificate will be saved as pdf and can be printed out or saved as a file
 all certificates are verifiable by a control code. this means that the certificate does not need to be signed by university staff. anyone to whom you may send the certificate can make sure that the certificate is correct by going to the web page indicated at the bottom of the certificate and then enter the civil registration number and the control code. the certificate is verifiable for 90 days.
 challenges in integrating programming into mathematics education
 how did swedish upper secondary mathematics teachers navigate the challenges that arose when programming was to be integrated into mathematics education? ana fuentes at university west delves into this question presenting her findings in a new thesis. she explores the development of the programming reform and how teachers dealt with obstacles and contradictions arising from changes to the curriculum.
 in 2018 the swedish national agency for education revised the mathematics curriculum including programming in mathematics education to promote digital competence assuming digitalization as crucial for equitable education. however implementation was far from straightforward and challenges arose promptly. ana fuentes doctoral student in informatics with a focus on work integrated learning sheds light on these issues in her thesis practice beyond technology when programming and mathematics teaching converge.
 she identified numerous uncertainties surrounding the reform highlighting the vagueness of the programming inclusion in the curriculum. questions regarding the extent specific programming components and programming languages remained unanswered.
 focusing on teacher learning
 anas background in computer science and experience as a high school teacher in programming and mathematics proved to be helpful as was her collaboration with the swedish national agency for education during the 2018 curriculum reform. both provided insights into the challenges faced by swedish mathematics teachers. the thesis explores teachers experiences in integrating programming drawing from extensive documentation of official reform strategies and interviews with teachers and national exam developers.
 the thesis focuses on the teachers learning in programming specifically how teachers prepare themselves and adapt their teaching. in line with university west profile on work integrated learning i have focused on the teachers rather than the students programming development.
 a study by the swedish teachers union during this period indicated that seven out of ten mathematics teachers felt uncertain about programming and worried about integrating it into their teaching. in 2021 the curriculum underwent further revisions interpreted by some as an acknowledgment of the challenges and stress within the mathematics teaching community.
 many teachers felt anxious which was not surprising. the teaching staff simply werent prepared ana explains.
 despite the vague framework the 2021 revisions lowered requirements for programming in the initial courses. ana emphasizes challenges beyond vague guidelines such as teachers lack of programming training or perceived inadequacy of received training. additionally the crowded nature of mathematics courses and the absence of programming components in national exams led some teachers to deprioritize programming in an already tight curriculum.
 several challenges  and significant potential
 anas thesis underscores the evolution of the swedish national agency for educations strategies over the years. she highlights the potential for longterm positive societal effects if implementation frustrations are addressed.
 clearer guidelines and teacher training are identified as crucial for successful programming integration into mathematics. but programming has a place in mathematics education and in my thesis i reveal two tactical approaches teachers have taken dual teaching and interspersed programming ana says.
 both approaches prioritize didactics over technology in dual teaching programming is introduced as a separate track often due to students lack of prerequisites. with interspersed programming the teacher incorporates programming into mathematics education where appropriate with mathematics progression guiding the integration.
 ana fuentes explains that there are other good examples to look to. in norway programming is included in the national exams. this has provided a measure of expectations something that has proven to yield positive results.
 for the reform to take hold programming needs to be part of the national exams. but there is also a need for clearer guidelines and teacher training. in this similar project in norway that i have been involved in we see a completely different effect. they include programming in the national exams and have an extensive number of teachers in training every semester says ana who now looks forward to returning to teaching in mathematics teacher education.
 while her doctoral studies are coming to an end anas interest in the intersection of mathematics and programming in education is far from over.
 the thesis practice beyond technology when programming and mathematics teaching converge
 contact ana fuentes doctor in work integrated learning with specialisation in informatics university west ana.fuentesmartinez@hv.se 46 70180 47 00
 new copyprint system
 read more about what this means here printing and copying
 change of telephony system
 during the day today may 28 högskolan väst is changing its telephone system. interference may occur.
 changes in the compensatory abilities in supporting academic resilience in swedish schools over time  compass
 this project focuses on socioeconomically disadvantaged children in sweden who albeit to their deprived family background manage to do well at school i. e. academically resilient children.
 the project attempts to identify factors related to the characteristics of these students as well as their teachers and schools that may be related to their success. in particular changes in academic resilience will be investigated. and these changes will be linked to the changes in different compensatory factors such as teacher competence school and teachers emphasis on academic success and class and school climate over time. in addition the project aims at investigating which features can predict resilience and thus function as a method for preventing drop out. data from the international largescale studies conducted by iea e.g. timss pirls and oecd pisa and the longitudinal database evaluation through followup etf constitutes the base for our empirical studies.
 the project expects to bring empirical evidences to teachers schools and policymakers about effective ways of organising education and allocating supports to enhance academic resilience at different levels of education system.
 chaplaincy at university west
 the chaplaincy at university west is a resource for students and staff at the university.
 you can talk to us about joy and grief life and faith identity and relations or whatever is important in your life.
 chaplaincy
 the easiest way to get an appointment is by contacting us by phone or email. all pastoral counselling is strictly confidential protected by law.
 silent room f318
 there is a silent room for all students in room f318. you can go there to light a candle for personal prayer or a moment of silence regardless of religion or faith.
 andreas pervikuniversitychaplaintel 0520472923mobil 0767683800epost andreas.pervik@svenskakyrkan.se
 do we really consider their concerns?  user challenges with electric car sharing
 active passive nonexisting or conditional?  social relations shaping energy use at workplaces
 dividing or sharing?  a timegeographical examination of eating labour and energy consumption in sweden
 learning for lower energy consumption
 enhanced participation or just another activity?  the social shaping of ipad use for youths with intellectual disabilities
 the neglected practice  uncertainties encountered by occupants in a new energy efficient building
 anchoring energy efficiency information in households everyday projects  peoples understanding of renewable heating systems
 study counsellor for
 international programme in politics and economics  ippe 180 credits
 master in leadership in digitalised organisations 120 credits
 master in sustainable development 120 credits
 master in work integrated political studies 120 credits
 master in it and management 60 credits
 coordinator for lectures in study technique and successful studies
 charlotte arghavan shahlaei examines how the digital transition affects engineers who develop the vehicles of the future. photo margareta valdemarsdotter.
 it is the economic and business aspects that are consequences of the digital transformation and societal ones. for example various studies examine what digital transformation mainly means when transforming business models for competitive advantage. most studies deal with digital transformation by focusing on the business models and competitive economic advantage. however the issue of digital transformation can also be understood in terms of the reconfiguration of work practices and work competences.
 charlotte wants answers to the following questions
 what is digital competence?
 what aspects of work change with the increased presence of digital technology at work?
 what are the consequences of these changed aspects regarding competence in the workplace?
 why do employees feel frustrated with their skills development despite successfully working with advanced digital technology?
 how can we support processes for competence development in situ and at the same time?
 differs from other types of changes
 secondly the process of a digital transformation differs from a process of change. a shift results from a diverse development of work boundaries relationships and a supportive approach. but a difference is where you have to replace competencies is usually controlled from a topdown implementation where you already have the answers to the defined problems.
 charlotte hopes that her results can contribute to a greater understanding among companies. she wants to make them aware that it becomes impossible for employees to make changes in projects and work processes constantly. those who work with and in the digital transformation need more explicit instructions and requirements and today there is a far too large gap between what companies want and what the engineers can handle.
 charting the future of transport an interview with sandra finér of volvo group
 in this interview sandra finér vice president of operations at volvo gto and plant manager of the tuve plant discusses volvo groups commitment to sustainable transport solutions. she emphasizes the need for a lean mindset an endtoend perspective and efficient process flows to address supply chain complexities. this interview delves into volvo groups transformative journey toward sustainable transport solutions and their mission to shape a better world.
 the volvo group strives for sustainable transport solutions that will shape the world we want to live in. it is a significant and important task and in it we face increasing complexity in our supply chain with larger variation and growing range of parts. this requires a lean mindset and an endtoend perspective. we need to create sustainable processes in our factories while giving equal consideration to what happens before and after the production of future trucks. we need to think in terms of process flow.we sometimes joke that production is all about logistics but we are entirely serious about the fact that competence in how to achieve effective process flows is crucial in this transformative journey. equally important is leadership and creating a selflearning organization ready to meet a world in rapid and constant change.
 it is a significant and essential transformation towards sustainable transport solutions and we look forward to it. because we want to contribute to shaping the world we want to live in.
 om chatboten
 cheating and plagiarism
 this is information to students at university west about cheating and plagiarism. what counts as cheating and plagiarism what will happen if you cheat and how can you avoid it?
 cheating is a breach of regulations that university west takes very seriously and every year students are warned or suspended from their studies because they cheated. cheating is regulated in the higher education ordinance 1993 100 chap. 10 where it is called deceive during examinations or other forms of assessment of study performance.
 cheating is a form of fraud in which the student primarily deceives him or herself. the purpose of studying is to develop the competence required for success in a job. qualifications based on academic dishonesty may have serious repercussions. the university is obliged to ensure that the higher education credits that are issued really reflect the individual students knowledge.
 what is cheating?
 cheating is the attempt to mislead or deceive the examiner in an examination or any coursework assessment written or oral. it is about trying to get your examination to look better than it otherwise would have done for example by bringing cheat sheets or unauthorized aids to the exam hall to cooperate when an assignment is to be performed individually or to retrieve information from the internet without indicating the source.
 plagiarism is a form of cheating. to reproduce in an examination what someone else has written for example in a previous exam book article or on a website without stating the source can be counted as plagiarism and lead to suspension. the same also applies to tables diagrams codes etc. that someone else has made. during the examination it is your knowledge skills and abilities that are to be assessed which is not possible if you plagiarize someone else.
 when you reproduce what someone else has written  done you must clearly state the source. if it is text with exactly the same wording as the source it should be marked with quotation marks. the person who is responsible for the original work should have credit for it by being quoted or referenced. note that plagiarism is not the same thing as completely copying a text or a piece of text. even if you rewrite a text it can be plagiarism if you do not specify the source. therefore be very careful that what you write or reproduce is really yours.
 if you commit plagiarism you may be warned or suspended from your studies. in the worst case you may even be forced to pay compensation to the person who owns the rights to a work for example a book. of course it is also not allowed to buy essays from others and then submit them in your own name.
 reusing text in an examination that you have previously used in another examination is only permitted if you clearly mark that it is a reuse. you must state where the text comes from by a reference to your own work. if it is exactly the same wording you should mark it as a quote since you are quoting yourself. a rule of thumb is always to handle your own texts as you would other texts
 cheat sheets and unauthorised aids
 using unauthorized aids such as a cheat sheet mobile phone pocket computer or books can be considered cheating. if there are authorized aids in an examination which is sometimes the case information about the aids is given in advance and will be clearly specified on the examination sheet.
 unauthorised collaboration
 in principle an examination is individual. no communication among students is permitted during the examination. in the case of written takehome assignments students are not allowed to collaborate on answers. the questions may be discussed with fellowstudents always carefully check what applies specifically for your course but the answers must be individually produced unless it is explicitly stated that collaboration is allowed. if you submit a text that is more or less identical to that of a fellowstudents this may be considered cheating.
 some examinations are group examinations. there you may cooperate with others but only in the manner expressly stated in the instructions for the examination. if the examination takes place in the form of regular group work you are jointly responsible for the assignment or the degree project. therefore you should make sure that all group members are familiar with the rules applying.
 what happens if you cheat?
 if a teacher or examination supervisor suspects cheating a report is submitted to the university vicechancellor. the circumstances are investigated by an official at the universitys administration who will also contact you to have your opinion before the investigation is submitted to the vicechancellor.
 the vicechancellor mat decide to dismiss the matter withou action issue a warning or refer the matter to the universitys disciplinary board. if the matter is referred there you will be given the opportunity to speak dirctly to the board before their decision. the disciplinary board may decide to suspend you completely from studies for a certain period of time.
 your teacher may not assess the reported examination before the matter has been investigated and the vicechancellor or disciplinary board have come to a decision.
 how to avoid cheating
 the best way to avoid cheating is to be familiar with the rules applying to different examination formats. the rules may vary for different assignments and between fields of study. it is your duty to keep informed about the rules applying to each examination. dont hesitate to ask your teacher if you are unsure about the rules.
 follow the teachers instructions
 make a point of following the instructions given by the teachers when the assignment is given. if you were absent on this occasion or feel uncertain about how to solve or perform the task contact your teacher or supervisor.
 the text of others
 learn the rules on how to use other peoples work. there must be a clear indication and distinction made between your ideas and formulations and what you draw from others. this rule applies to book material as well as the internet etc.
 when quoting
 copy the text exactly.
 enclose the quotation in double quotation marks.
 give the source details of the quotation as practised in your field of study.
 list the source in the bibliography or reference list.
 when referencing
 rephrase the text in your own words.
 clarify by using formulations such as according to the author as the author writes or similar.
 follow the rules of referencing that are used in your field of study.
 ouriginal plagiarism checker
 university west continuously works to safeguard the students exclusive rights to their works and prevent plagiarism. students should feel confident that their work is credited or referenced when used by others. in the same way you should quote or refer to the sources used in your work.
 university west uses the web based system ouriginal to check for plagiarism in written assignments essays or exam works. you submit your text in canvas and it will be run it against a database. the system is also used by other universities and schools and plagiarism is checked against all work submitted regardless of where. ouriginal also discovers plagiarism of texts from the internet journals and other sources.
 the teacher receives a report from ouriginal which shows if there are similarities with other texts what the similarities look like and how extensive they are. the report also presents sources for the similarities. if it appears that you have used other peoples work without references the teacher must report attempts at deception during the examination cheating which are investigated as above.
 read more about ouriginal and how the plagiarism control works.
 like all universities university west has a disciplinary board which decides on matters concerning students who are suspected of trying to deceive the examiner in various ways. the disciplinary board is made up of teacher and student representatives a legally qualified member and the vicechancellor as chairman.
 if the disciplinary board finds that the suspicion of cheating is justified the board may with the support of the higher education ordinance 1993100 decide on a warning or suspension from studies. during a suspension the student may not participate in any teaching or examination or use the universitys resources. this  applies to all courses not just the one you have cheated on. a suspension can have major consequences for the individual student in the form of delayed studies and canceled student loans.
 more information about suspension
 further information about the disciplinary board is found in the link at the bottom of this page.
 if you need more information on how to write academic papers in the appropriate way please consult your teacher or supervisor.
 contact and more information
 qualified analyst                        kvalificerad utredare
 child and youth studies conference  1011 november 2022
 the theme of this years conference highlights the challenges that shape the living conditions and future possibilities for children and young people today  segregation and rises in disparity climate change war and unrest. how do young people percieve the challenges they are faced with and what strategies do they use? what can and should we do as adults and professionals to best support children and youth?
 download the full conference program
 download the book of abstracts
 keynotes in english
 adnan abdul ghani works at save the children sweden as an migration thematic expert and is a member of the eu commission expert group on migration asylum and integration.
 if you were at last years conference you might already have met adnan and know that he has an outstanding ability to convey how children are affected by war and conflict as well as by harsh asylum laws and shortcomings in receiving countries. this year adnan will get us up to date on the current situation for refugee children both in a european and swedish perspective.
 presentation formats
 these are the formats for this years conference. if you have any questions please contact buv@hv.se
 short presentation
 30 minutes including 15 minutes presentation and 15 minutes discussion with appointed discussant. register with an abstract of maximum 300 words excluding references. for accepted submissions full paper of 40008000 words should be submitted by october 16th.
 round table discussion
 35 papersshort presentations with a common focus is presented and discussed for 6090 minutes. register with a common abstract of maximum 500 words excluding references.
 review of abstracts
 submitted abstracts have been reviewed in regard to
 clarity of the projects purpose and methods
 relevance for child and youth studies and the conference theme
 contribution to the knowledge field or society
 our reserach
 read about our joint projects
 child promotionpreventions for mental health outcomes  from policy to actions and their effects
 given recent challenges of increased mental health problems and mental health inequalities among children due to differences according to ses country of birth and gender these outcomes will be targeted by the programme. child mental health on a population level is not dependent on single promotionpreventive initiatives but rather on the collective web of different initiatives provided by multiple actors on national and local level. further the success of a national public health policy is dependent on how well it is implemented by local authorities. thus the programme will have a strong emphasize on the local level municipalities and county councils that are responsible for the vast majority of promotionpreventive actions.
 child2ling
 in the project we focus on three swedishmedium daycare classrooms at three different geographical sites in finland. in these sites the patterns of language dominance in the surrounding community vary as do the proportions of children from bilingual homes in relation to monolingual swedishspeaking homes. over a period of two years we collect data observations video and audiorecordings and interviews with 3 to 5yearold bilingual children to get to know how they use and think about languages. we also interview and observe staff and visit the homes of bilingual children. in addition to the fieldwork we do discourse analysis on ongoing societal language debates and policy documents.
 the project thus collects data from a number of different levels in order to find out which language conceptions and practices are surrounding and affecting these bilingual children. the project uses nexus analysis scollon and scollon 2004 as a discourse analytical tool to unpack this complexity to gain a better understanding of bilingualism and its role possibilities and challenges within institutions families and finland as a society.
 other reserachers
 åsa palviainen project leader professor of swedish department of languages university of jyväskylä
 mari bergroth post doc phd department of languages university of jyväskylä.
 elin almér post doc phd department of languages university of jyväskylä 20142015 2017.
 sally boyd professor em. university of gothenburg
 leena huss professor em. the hugo valentin centre uppsala university
 mila schwartz professor bilingualism and bilingual education at oranim academic college of education in haifa israel
 children growing up with economic disadvantage children and parents experiences of receiving economic support from a charitable foundation
 the mayflower foundation majblomman is swedens largest childrens charity and has 650 local associations evenly spread throughout the country. the mission of the mayflower foundation is to fight child poverty. as well as providing financial aid on a local basis for children in need as a special interest group the foundation lobbies national policymakers on issues affecting children and aims to influence public opinion in the longer term. recently due to fiscal cutbacks in the swedish welfare system and increasing numbers of families finding themselves in economic difficulties the foundation has found itself providing economic aid to increased numbers of families.
 childrens participation in the family
 nina tryggvason phd student emma sorbring supervisor and project leader
 pac project is financed by the national institute of health i usa.
 childrens transitions from preschool to school
 this project its studying childrens transitions between different school types. one of the aims is to promote cooperation between different school forms.
 this takes part in a small community in sweden along with university west and its studying childrens transitions between different school types. this school differs some from others in sense that different school types are placed in the same building. one of the aims is to promote cooperation between different school forms.
 benefits identified in the analysis is that most of the participating children know both the school environment and most of the teachers. this does not apply to all children when some children are coming from other preschools when they start preschool class at age six years. it also emerges that the structure during handovers from preschool to preschool classes vary even if the municipality has some guidelines for how the information to be submitted. the professionals have different systems for educational documentation in the various school forms and documentation as a source of knowledge is not taken advantage of the various types of school. the information requested is not primarily the learning processes in children having participated in but more important is how the children handle social relations. at handovers wish educators thus in the first hand information on children with special needs. although teachers work in the same school one of the conclusions in this study shows that there are some discontinuity concerning documentation tools childrens learning and the organization of groups and childrens social relationships. and that the childrens perspective of passing through a lot of groupings before they start school is not considered when the teachers are planning the classes.
 christian ohlsson
 avancerad webbdesign
 cisco ccna3 switching
 cisco ccna4 wide area networks
 cisco cyberops security
 multimedia med silverlight
 webbproduktion med flash
 vicechancellors and university governing boards secretary
 teaching assistant
 personnummer  personal identity number
 ekonomi och it  school of business economics and it
 epost  email  university west email
 certificate of international merits cim
 information about cim in english
 cinahl closed monday 2711 at 12002000
 cinahl will be closed on monday 2711 from 1200 to 2000.
 maintenance work on the cinahl database will take place during this time and cinahl will not be accessible.
 circumet  circular metal components for swedish manufacturing industry competence development on the mast
 the circumet initiative has the ambition to develop and implement tailored and concise needmotivated continuing education courses 8090 credits in total related to relevant topics for the metal component manufacturing sector with the fight against climate change as a core concept.
 the main aim is to provide the muchneeded competence supply to the exportheavy swedish component manufacturing industry which leads to increased competitiveness and sustainability at the international forefront both technically and commercially. project owner is jönköping university of technology and participating partners are chalmers university of technology university west and rise swecast and ivf. the developed courses will be available as standalone courses andor will be integrated into existing or new masters programs at higher education institutions. in order to give businesses wider access to the supply of skills at higher levels the courses developed in circumet will be used as a basis for developin
 om föreläsningenthe global garment industry is one of the most significant industrial sectors in terms of the demands it places on natural resources and the pollution it emits. the presentation summarised the environmental impacts of the industry and the consequences of the fast fashion business model that has affected it. recycling has been proposed as a solution to the woes of the sector but it also faces challenges. the potential for recycling was discussed in the context of other potential interventions.
 this is just figures but the impact is real.
 university west cisco centre is a leading institute for advanced networking professionals in west scandinavia. we are the home of the cisco academy training center catc scandinavia.
 the catc includes our training center tc and our support center sc. our main goal is to provide students with the internet technology skills essential when working with both local and global networks in todays multinational economy.
 our vision is to enhance the learning experience by combining theoretical studies and handon labs thus fostering the highest skilled network professionals possible. we also aim to promote internet technology both in learning and industry taking on and teaching the new technologies before they become common in the marketplace.
 as all other tcs and scs with qualified instructor trainers we are responsible for ensuring the instructional qualities of the regional cisco academy instructors who train students. along with cisco we aim to set the standard of quality for the entire networking academy.
 join vmware academy
 for schools who want to become an it academy
 read more about catc
 travel information
 physical
 show more
 read more in english
 investigation on infrared welding parameters of natural fibre reinforced polypropylene composite
 lifecycle investigation of components made of stainless steel using additive manufacturing
 development of a process for environmental life cycle investigations
 multifunctional sandwich panel design with lithiumion polymer batteries
 sustainability of metal powder additive manufacturing
 sustainability of additive manufacturing  electron beam melting of in718
 energy and cost estimation of a featurebased machining operation on hrsa
 ana esther bonilla hernández tomas beno claes fredriksson
 thomas svensson christian åhs
 josephine westman
 sustainability of wire arc additive manufacturing using inconel 625
 integrating materials and manufacturing education
 sustainability and circular economy of powder based additive manufacturing
 pontus berntsson johan henrysson
 process sustainability evaluation for manufacturing of a component with the 6r application
 ana esther bonilla hernández tao lu tomas beno claes fredriksson i. s. jawahir
 design analysis and improvement ofcopper indium gallium selenium thinfilm solar arrays using scaps1d simulation software
 on cutting tool resource management
 ana esther bonilla hernández
 evaluation of logistical capacity and future storage needs at the technical material analysis department of volvo cars
 weld head motion control of girth and tubular joint welding simulations in lsdyna
 the performance of an iced aircraft wing
 in a hybrid classroom the idea is that students online should not feel that they are watching the class but that they are part of the class.
 alc opens up new ways of teaching as they have round tables chairs with wheels whiteboards and digital screens for each group.
 the connected classroom
 in many of our classrooms it is possible to connect to zoom with the technology installed in the classroom.
 lightboard
 a lightboard is a whiteboard in glass that is lit up and filmed from the front. in the recording the text appears in front of you
 recording
 in the recording studio you take care of everything yourself. you can record with camera a document camera or your screen with a presentation web page or document.
 if you teach remotely or participate in a zoom meeting and want to increase the sound and image quality then you can use one of our hybrid studios.
 climate challenges are driving joel to develop lighter and more efficient aircraft engines
 congratulations on your appointment. what does having the title of professor mean to you?
 thank you it feels great to have finally reached my goal. in practice it does not change much since i have been doing the work of a professor for a few years. this autumn i finally had time to write my application to become a professor because the pandemic meant that i was able to work from home with a few less distractions.
 it has to do with my curiosity and thirst for new knowledge. i have a lot of patience and like to work longterm and hard. these are qualities that are well suited for this profession. but they would probably have been just as valuable if i had continued to focus on my dream of becoming a professional footballer. when my interest in studies took over while in high school i hung up my football boots.
 what events have meant the most in your career so far?
 what happens next?
 contact joel andersson joel.andersson@hv.se
 cloakroom libraries book bags and being with books materiality and affective practices in reading promotion activities for younger children in preschool
 the aim of the project is to investigate how younger childrens affective and spatial book use is motivated and practiced in swedish preschools and further to historizice sociomaterial reading practices with younger children. this will be investigated through fieldwork at preschools focusgroup interviews with preschool teachers and archival work. the theoretical basis for the investigation is poststructuralist with a focus on affective practices embodiment gender and age.
 cloud security parttime campus sim600
 cloud security 7.5 hp
 main topics included in the course
 introduction to cloud security
 managing user identities and access in the cloud
 cloud network security
 data security in the cloud
 cloud security management and governance
 operations best practices
 scientific methodology
 pfc600 principer för cybersäkerhet principles of cybersecurity
 clouds  intelligent algorithms to support circular solutions for sustainable production system
 cisco networking academy program with information about books curricula booking etc.
 books  curricula
 1 introduction to networks
 3 scaling networks
 4 connecting networks
 online reading
 other academies
 vmware it academy
 kivuto  download software
 cocreating communities
 by cocreation we mean collaboration and dialogue with and between actors in the community to understand promote and strengthen sustainable social development processes.
 an example of thematic focus might be but is not limited to studies in
 segregation the sense of belonging social equity gender equality inclusiveness develop and promote social practices for a sustainable and equitable social development that includes the entire community.
 collaborate with our students
 do you need to develop your business? there is a great interest and commitment among our students to contribute to societal development. we offer several different ways for you to collaborate with our students.
 get in touch with us and we will tell you about the opportunities for collaboration with our students.
 collaborate with us
 how we interact
 interaction with partners outside the university is on the basis of shared responsibility and commitment for increased utilization shorter innovation cycles and increased social relevance. cooperation with the surrounding community is for university west both an academic interest and the public interest. systematic work structures and working methods for collaboration provides good conditions for longterm sustainable relationships that strengthens and develops over time.
 ail platforms models for collaboration
 production technology centre ptc
 working life in educational programs
 university west works with a variety of practical models that aim to increase interaction and cooperation with working life. this is done through various forms of workintegrated learning such as
 workbased training vfu
 student project ie. project work or master thesis
 commissioned education
 international partnerships
 collaboration child and youth studies
 about our partnership model
 outreach projects
 orust municipalityhittadrivet fas 2
 finished projects
 ale municipalityyoung people with risky use of alcohol and drugs
 fyrbodal local federationwelfare technology for increased wellbeing and empowermentbarn och ungas våld i familjen
 grästorp municipalityteam agera  an increased and deepened pupilhealth intervention through interprofessional collaborationledarskap i klassrummet
 stenungsund municipalitychildrens transitions from preschool to school
 trollhättan city and västra götaland countysvenska som andraspråk i förskolan  metoder och strategieragency gender and intercultural encounters of children and young people a case study of a football club
 uddevalla municipalityparent resource  a deepened and broadened support for families in needabout teachers relationships with parents whose children are regarded to have problems.
 vara municipalitythe significance of early interventions in preschool
 åmål municipalityhealth care for youths in åmål
 collegial conversations in schoolage educare  the work team is the key
 how can collegial conversations in schoolage educare create learning and meaning for the work team? and ultimately lead to improved quality? this is the focus of a new dissertation from university west. the content of the dissertation could be a piece of the puzzle and could contribute to improved quality in schoolage educare operations that have been subject to some criticism and national reviews since being included in school operations.
 swedish schoolage educare are unique operations in an international comparison. it is an educational curriculumdriven operation for pupils from the age of 6 up to and including the spring term of the year in which they turn 13. the schoolage educare is to stimulate pupils development and learning and offer them meaningful leisure and recreation. like other forms of school schoolage educare have a compensatory mission. children and pupils are to be supported and stimulated to develop as far as possible. one aim is to compensate for differences in childrens and pupils ability to absorb education. according to the education act the purpose of schoolage educare is also to complement the education provided in preschool class and primary school both in terms of time by receiving pupils before and after school and in terms of content by giving pupils experiences and knowledge that are different in part from those provided by school.
 changed mission
 in the past decade a number of changes that have affected schoolage educare have been implemented. the mission of schoolage educare was partly changed when the current education act came into force and schoolage educare are now part of the school system. thus schoolage educare have also been given a section in primary school curricula. at the same time other conditions have also changed.
 the component i studied  snack time  used to be a central educational activity in schoolage educare. the children were involved in the kitchen preparing the snack and there was room for more informal conversations that were very important in terms of development and learning. today new rules govern and the children are rarely involved in the preparations and the snack is eaten in the school canteen which often becomes a louder and more unsettled environment that is more difficult to control says sanna hedrén a recent doctor of teaching and learning with a focus on work integrated learning at university west.
 focus on snack time
 it is precisely snack time that is the focus of sanna hedréns dissertation in which she has looked at schoolage educare staff and collegial conversations and how these conversations can be educational creating meaning for those involved.
 its about putting what happens in the context of everyday life under the magnifying glass and talking collegially to each other about delimited work components. looking at how they act and why they act the way they do in certain situations in this case at snack time she says.
 observations of two work teams
 in her dissertation sanna hedrén has not only studied what the work teams say about snack time but also how and why certain things are said and others not something that has been shown to be influenced by the collegial relationships in the work team. she has studied two different work teams at a schoolage educare through observations of conversations designed for the study. employees were asked to choose a work component that they wanted to discuss and the one they chose was snack time.
 it was a component that both teams felt was a bit messy and without a clear division of responsibilities between the staff and where there was room for improvement says sanna.
 the conversations conducted took place on site. they had been given the task of filming snack time taking place watched the video together and each person described what they noticed. as the conversation wound down they watched the video again and then again described what they noticed this time and summarised what they would take away from the conversation to work on.
 there was a clear difference between what they noticed and talked about after the first and second viewing of the video. after the first viewing the focus was very much on practical aspects such as that it would be better to do x when pupils are to wash their hands while after the second viewing it was more about underlying factors such as how to motivate students more to influence their behaviour. so you can see that something happens when you talk says sanna.
 the importance of the work team is central
 the dissertation shines a light on the work team and its importance for achieving a high quality operation. the work team being important in a process of change. similarly it became clear that the way in which people talk about work components  snack time in this case  is influenced by collegiality. the work teams included in the study were quite different in terms of composition. one 1 consisted mostly of people who had been in the same workplace for a long time and who were well bonded while the second 2 work team consisted of many new people some trained and some with no formal education who were not so well bonded.
 the results of the study show that the two participating work teams creation of meaning emerge as polyphonic and unisonal respectively. polyphonic creation of meaning as occurred in team two means that several different interpretations of everyday practice are negotiated in parallel in collegial conversations.
 in that team there are many voices that want to take charge many different opinions and they find it difficult to agree on how work components are to be executed.
 unisonal creation of meaning as found in team one means having the same interpretation of how to do snack time meaning that negotiations during the conversation are based on the same interpretation of everyday practice.
 in this team however there is less development as they agree on how to do things and think it works well so the team wants to stick to this way of executing the task.
 time for reflection necessary
 the conclusion is that the conditions that schoolage educare staff have for joint creation of meaning and learning in and through collegial conversations lead to the reproduction of staff assumptions about snack time and schoolage educare practice. it turns out that changing the way in which we talk about schoolage educare practice and bringing in new perspectives is difficult. to enable productive collegial conversations where joint creation of meaning leads to new and deeper understanding of everyday practice events teams need to be stable and given time to continuously reflect on their practice.
 the composition of the team naturally shapes the conversation but at the same time a structured conversation allows everyone to express what they experience regardless of background and experience. in this way conversation as a form of learning levels the playing field and everyone can meet in that conversation and are able to influence content learning and outcomes.
 sannas advice to the management of schoolage educare is to provide more space for discussion and joint reflection.
 the work teams have far too little time for structured discussion. operations would benefit from work teams taking time out to regularly reflect and talk about what they have experienced. what little time is given to discussions today is mainly about concrete planning substitute management or putting out fires. i believe that taking the time to pause preferably alongside management and principals is a decisive factor in improving the quality of the operations.
 to dissertation meaningmaking through mealtimes in schoolage educare positionings instaffs collegial conversations
 contact sanna hedrén doctor of teaching and learning with a focus on work integrated learning sanna.hedren@hv.se 0730 36 23 54
 combitech unit manager in secure iot salah hashemi
 salah hashemi is the manager for combitechs consultant unit within the field of secure iot.
 can you give us a little insight into the work of combitech?
 combitech is an independent technical consulting company and part of the defence and security group within saab ab. we have a nordic base but we also work with clients internationally. we have almost 1900 qualified consultants in some 30 locations in sweden norway finland and denmark. we cover a wide range of skill areas systems engineering technical information solutions security solutions autonomy and connectivity cybersecurity and digital and management. our clients are operating in manufacturing the service industry the public sector and defence. my division alone cybersecurity has about 300 security consultants.
 my area secure iot covers many fields including automotive cybersecurity industrial iot telecommunication with a focus on 5g solutions and medical technology.
 what exciting developments are you working on around cybersecurity?
 within my own department we work on smart manufacturing connected to the industry 4.0 era that many companies are trying to enter. this involves connectivity and communications between many devices such as sensors smart phones vehicle to vehicle v2v etc. and also other infrastructure components such as sensors to gateways vehicle to traffic lights v2x and a wide range of other solutions.
 we also help clients be aligned and compliant with many security best practices and standards in this area including isaiec 62443 an international series of standards on industrial automation and control systems nist security frameworks and more.  thus cybersecurity is a critical business enabler for secure transformation to a more digital and connected world.
 we are also collaborating with some wellknown automotive manufacturers and a group of universities in projects related to the upcoming cybersecurity regulations from unece and the standard of isosae 21434 road vehicles  cybersecurity engineering. these projects are related to vehicle resiliency i.e. increasing the ability of vehicles to withstand cyberattacks.
 what are your thoughts on university wests new masters programme in cybersecurity?
 university west is planning to be one of the best schools in the field of cybersecurity. the masters programme in cybersecurity is the right way to reach this goal. and combitech will of course support this initiative with its substantial knowledge and experience in the cybersecurity domain.
 right now combitech is running an advanced cybersecurity course for university west bachelor students in their last year. this course is centred on applied learning students need applied knowledge from the real world that they can use directly after graduation. most other schools are not as practical.
 this course focuses on areas attractive for the market and bases lectures labs and assignments on real cases in industry. we are working together on this now and i am already interested in some of the students coming to my team. i can use their knowledge directly in some of the projects and assignments for our different clients. im sure employers will be very impressed. my objective is to help students be more applied in their learning.
 what skills do you expect graduates of this programme to have?
 were interested in graduates with advanced cybersecurity skills. one important area is secure system development life cycles ssdlc. this means integrating security controls from the beginning of a development project.
 combitech is also interested in graduates with cybersecurity skills relating to the automotive industry and the field of autonomous driving. one of the assignments and labs in our advanced cybersecurity course is about threat modelling and risk analysis related to this area. students can use these skills on the job as soon as they graduate.
 we also need graduates with skills in industrial cybersecurity  graduates who understand the security challenges and situations related to operation technology ot and industrial control systems ics in manufacturing industries and can use a proper methodology to protect the manufacturingot environment. students who can do this in accordance with the isaiec 62443 standard will be more prepared to work with related projects directly after graduation. we provide students with a real case study from industry so they learn how to implement cybersecurity controls to reach the targeted security levels.
 we are also looking for graduates with expertise in cloud computing technologies. students need to understand and be familiar with base technologies used in this area and the security mechanisms to protect sensitive data and information both in transit and in storage in the cloud.
 combitech has also created a talent programme. the combitech cyber security program ccsp covers both technical and business perspectives with some possibility to go into depth in certain areas. it will introduce students to combitechs core values and give them the soft skills needed to succeed as a consultant.
 is there anything you want students interested in this field to know?
 combitech is a big company and covers so many other security areas. we work on some of the biggest projects in sweden. we offer many opportunities in very interesting hightech areas. im really proud to be able to help move towards a more cybersecure society  one of combitechs pillars in the cybersecurity area.
 im also proud to be able to help students and to begin this collaboration with university west. it is the first time we have collaborated in an advanced programme at a university for this area. it is very cool this oneyear master i hope we continue to work together.
 learn more about the master in cybersecurity at university west
 do you have comments or complaints about something related to your courses or study program? it is important for us to take note of the students views in order to be able to remedy any shortcomings. before you leave comments it is important that you know what applies in different situations and what rights and obligations you have as a student. read more below.
 where to turn depends on the views or complaints
 discrimination and harassment
 if you feel that you have been discriminated against or harassed follow university wests routines for discrimination. you can find the routines here.
 via the student union you can get in touch with the studentombud. the studentombud represents all students no matter if you are a member of the student union or not.
 you can turn to the studentombud if you have questions or if you feel that you have been unfairly treated in any way by a teacher or other staff. you can be anonymous in your contact.
 send in a student matter and read more on the student union website.
 according to the higher education ordinance 1993 100 you have the right to appeal certain decisions made by the university. these include admission credit transfer diplomas study breaks and withdrawal of the doctoral students educational resources. the decisions include information on how to appeal.
 the university has local rules for examinations course pm course plans course evaluations etc. links to rules and guidelines for education at basic and advanced level. guidelines for doctoral education can be found in the staff portal. take a look at them to see what rights and obligations you have as a student.
 the content and structure of courses and study programs
 if you want to give opinions or make complaints you should first contact the teacher concerned. if you do not receive an answer or do not want to accept the answer you can turn to other responsible parties according to this order
 program responsible teacher if you are studying in a program
 head of subdivision at the department that provides the course or program
 head of the department that provides the course or program
 to find the right person see the universitys organization click on each departments page on management. you can also ask in the service center.
 if for some reason you cannot or do not want to turn to those responsible at the department you have the opportunity to receive support from the student union at university west. if you are a doctoral student you can also turn to the director of studies for postgraduate education or to the subject council.
 study environment and service
 do you have comments or complaints regarding the universitys premises it equipment study administration student support  library and the like? contact servicecenter@hv.se.
 comparative politics and public administration fulltime campus jpo100
 comparative politics and public administration 15 hp
 the comparative politics and public administration course introduces students to two major fields in political science. taken together these fields deal with formulation design and implementation of policy. we discuss such fundamental questions as the difference between democracy and autocracy the role of parliament and government in a political system or difference between the public and the private sector. students also learn about the basics of comparative method which helps them distinguish between various institutional designs and outcomes as well as normatively assess political processes using notions of corruption rule of law good governance and ethics in civil service.
 you also need english 6 mathematics 2a or mathematics 2b or mathematics 2c social studies 1b or social studies 1a1 1a2
 compile the educational offer at swedish universities
 the purpose of this project is to compile the skills development that swedish universities today offer in terms of courses aimed at professionals in electromobility and to identify gaps in the range of skills that are necessary to enable future electrification.
 advanced level education in electrical engineering is in strong demand from the industry as that competence is absolutely necessary for business climate change and for the electrification of society. the challenges in the energy system are growing with the ongoing electrification where the electrification of the vehicle fleet is an important part and that electricity production from unplanned sources is increasing sharply. the changes for both industries and the vehicle fleet as well as the changes in the power system lead to new challenges and the need for new skills.
 according to svensk näringsliv 60 of swedish companies believe that a lack of skills hinders climate change and 71 feel that it is difficult to recruit competent personnel in electrical engineering. this demonstrates the importance of providing advanced level education in electromobility the need to make visible the course offerings that exist today and the importance of compiling how the need will look in a few years time.
 the project is carried out within the framework of the swedish electromobility center and will be reported to the management on two occasions during 2024.
 computer aided manufacturing cam parttime campus cab400
 computer aided manufacturing cam 5 hp
 this course focus on the cam process. the cam process concerns the steps nescessary to implement from a cad model to a finished part from cnc machining center. these steps involve configuration av cam software toolpaths programming tool selection cutting data postprocessing and simulation.
 gpp100introduction to programming with python and iot and
 ric100technical drawing and introduction to cad and
 sst200sensor technology and
 sdt200logic control engineering and
 loa202logistics or the equivalent.
 computer aided manufacturing cam parttime campus cab600
 computer aided manufacturing cam 3 hp
 the cam process concerns the steps nescessary to implement from a cad model to a finished part from cnc machining center. these steps involve cad model creation configuration of cam software toolpaths programming tool selection cutting data postprocessing and simulation. after completion of the course students gain knowledge and understanding within these areas.
 bachelor of science degree in materials science and engineering mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering production technology or equivalent. in addition at least 7.5 he credits in materials science at least 15 he credits in mathematics and english benglish 6 or equivalent are required.
 computer engineering in practice parttime campus pdt401
 computer engineering in practice 7.5 hp
 in the course students carry out a practical development project supported by lectures and seminars. the theory seminars cover themes related to project management and software engineering such as project planning agile methods requirements engineering architectural design implementation and verification and validation.
 60 credits in computer engineering or computer science or equivalent
 computersimulated optimisation of a sheet metal press line
 if optimisation is simulated instead more progress can be made in finding the best settings. there is less time pressure and no restrictions caused by the risk of damaging the equipment. at the same time everything is very realistic because the actual control systems are used in the simulations. the results can easily be fed back into production.
 computers at campus
 at university west we have approximately 500 student computers available according to below
 note it is not allowed to have food and drinks at the computers. it is forbidden to install software.
 general computer rooms
 study spaces in the library
 specific department computer rooms are equipped for training with special needs. these rooms are reserved to the departments students and are being administrated and supported by the departments staff.
 software content in these halls are governed by department staff.
 responsible school of business economics and itj232 3d animationresponsible department of engineering scienced119 network lab ciscod204 network lab ciscod216 network lab ciscod222 reglerlab fysikd225 elektroniklabd226 elkraftlab
 contact and visit
 the rules of conduct are designed with the universitys responsibility for the work environment of employees and students in focus.
 the activities at university west will be characterised by openness accessibility and contact with the surrounding community. the purpose of these rules of conduct is to ensure that everyone who stays at the university should feel safe and secure. by following the rules of conduct we create a good working and study environment as well as the conditions for an open and inclusive university.
 the rules of conduct apply to everyone who is in and directly adjacent to the universitys premises.
 who is allowed on the universitys premises?
 the universitys premises are primarily a study and workplace for students and employees. but here the public also has access to premises such as  student square café library restaurant.the public is welcome to use the student centre for a limited time in connection with their errand. the student centre is primarily a place for students and employees to meet and to study in peace and quiet.the universitys students also have access to student areas in the form of study landscapesgroup rooms computer rooms and student kitchenettes.
 only students who have been registered on the course intended for the teaching session are admitted to the premises of a teachers teaching session. students who are admitted but not registered on the programme have access subject to availability. teachers may grant exceptions for the presence of a person other than a registered or admitted student at a teaching session for which the teacher is responsible.
 based on the universitys security procedures only employees can enter the universitys office premises. if you want to meet any of the universitys staff on any matter then book a meeting with the person in question.
 members of the public or students who do not have the right to be in a room must leave the room at the request of an employee at the university.
 students and staff may not give a person access to a locked space without making sure that the person in question has the right to stay in the room in question.
 at lectures and seminars that are announced as public conferences and socalled open house events the public may have access to designated premises in addition to public premises.
 authentication
 students and staff who are on the universitys premises after 2000 are obliged to be able to identify themselves at the request of staff at the university or by security personnel.
 with regard to the staffs work environment and the students teaching environment it is not permitted for children to be in teaching rooms examination rooms and premises with particularly sensitive equipment.
 teachers may grant exceptions for childrens attendance at teaching sessions for which the teacher is responsible.
 this prohibition does not apply to underage students who are admitted to university west.
 general rules of conduct
 for everyones wellbeing and for everyone who stays on the universitys premises to feel safe and secure it is forbidden to
 litter or soil damage or destroy the universitys premises or property.
 without permission move or take furnishings or other property belonging to the university.
 harass or act in a threatening manner towards other people.
 behave in a way that is likely to cause annoyance to others within the meaning of chapter 16. section 16 of the penal code.
 use equipment on wheels such as skateboards bicycles kickbikes inline skates or similar. exceptions are made for functional equipment such as wheelchairs.
 consume alcoholic beverages with the exception of beverages with an alcoholic strength by volume of less than 2.3  without a special authorisation.
 possess use store transfer produce acquire procure or offer narcotics in the manner specified in section 1 of the narcotic punishment act 196864 and with the meaning of narcotics according to section 8 of the same act. people who are under the influence of alcohol andor other drugs must be turned away from the universitys premises.
 possess use store transfer produce acquire for the purpose of transferring and offering doping substances in the manner specified in the act 19911969 on the prohibition of certain doping substances and with the meaning of doping substances under section 1 of the same act.
 smoking tobacco ecigarette or equivalent within the university premises. smoking is only allowed outside a zone valid from eight meters outside the entrance doors.
 use the universitys premises for exclusively private use.
 plug in household electrical appliances such as a kettle or coffee maker without a permanently installed timer.
 candles are not allowed on the universitys premises.
 carry and house private pets with the exception of functional dogs such as guide dogs narcotics dogs resource dogs or similar.
 overnight in the universitys premises.
 sleep in the public areas such as student squares cafés libraries restaurants.
 stay for a longer period of time in the universitys student square and thus occupy study space for the universitys students.
 university library
 in addition to what is stated in these rules of conduct the general terms and conditions of borrowing and the librarys own rules of conduct apply to the university library.
 sound recording photography and filming etc. in connection with teaching situations
 the main rule is that sound recording photography filming and similar recording of lectures seminars and other teaching situations are not permitted.
 teaching teachers have the option of explicitly giving permission for sound recording photography or filming at their own teaching sessions. the teacher also determines the conditions that must apply to the recording in the teaching situation in question for example that only sound recording may take place.
 a student with a disability who is deemed by the university to need special aids in the form of sound recording photography andor filming of teaching sessions has the right to make such recording. the student must notify this need well in advance of the teaching session and the recording may only be made by the student himself or herself through personal presence at the teaching session.
 the fact that sound recording photography and filming at a given time have been approved does not entail a right for the student or other person responsible for such recording to disseminate make available or in any other way use the recording for other than their personal use.
 these rules do not affect the right the university may have to record photograph and film lectures and other teaching situations.
 when assessing the consequences of violations of university wests rules of conduct the principle of proportionality laid down in the administrative procedure act 2017900 must always be taken into account. the principle means that a measure must never go beyond what is necessary and may only be taken if the intended result is in reasonable proportion to the inconvenience that can be assumed to arise for the person against whom the measure is directed.
 students or members of the public who do not have the right to stay in a specially designated room may be asked by the universitys employees to leave the premises with immediate effect. if the person does not comply with the request security guards or if the situation so requires the police can be called.
 students or members of the public who violate university wests rules of conduct may be asked by the universitys employees to cease the prohibited activities and to leave the university or premises with immediate effect. if the person does not comply with the request security guards or if the situation so requires the police can be called.
 students have a farreaching right to participate in teaching for which they are registered. a request to a student to leave a teaching session should therefore only be made in the event of a breach of the rules of conduct that means that teaching is disrupted or hindered. a request to leave a teaching session may only be made by the person responsible for the teaching session and entails a temporary exclusion from the session in question.
 disciplinary measures according to chapter 10 of the higher education ordinance 1993100 can be taken against a student who violates the universitys rules of conduct.
 an employee who draws attention to or is made aware that another employee is violating university wests rules of conduct should inform the employees immediate manager for handling in accordance with the universitys current rules. violation of the rules of conduct may give rise to disciplinary liability under the public employment act 1994260.
 these rules of conduct apply from 16 november 2021.
 at ac crisis
 crisis and emergency
 if something happens  here you will find information on how to act in different situations
 conference chairs
 amir hajbolouri  university west amir.hajbolouri@hv.se
 program chairs
 matthias söllner  university of kassel soellner@unikassel.de
 munir y. mandviwalla  temple university munir.mandviwalla@temple.edu
 leona chandra kruse  university of agder leona.chandra@uia.no
 john venable  curtin university john.venable@cbs.curtin.edu.au
 prototype chairs
 panel and workshop chairs
 kieran conboy  university of galway kieran.conboy@universityofgalway.ie
 local chair
 gunnar peterson  university west gunnar.peterson@hv.se
 website chair
 anna hallberg  university west anna.hallberg@hv.se
 general chairs
 robert winter  university of st gallen robert.winter@unisg.ch
 conference on sustainability attracted the financial elite
 it was a highly international group of academics and experts in the field of finance who gathered at marstrands havshotell 1314 june. one of the most prominent guests was ed altman professor of finance emeritus new york university stern school of business. altman warned among other things of the development of more and more socalled zombie companies  e.g.companies that are close to bankruptcy but survive due to unhealthy market conditions.
 maher asal university west together with the biggest star of the conference ed altman professor of finance emeritus new york university stern school of business.
 university west and the university of gothenburg center for finance hosted the conference with the theme of sustainable finance. it all happened in the memory of professor clas wihlborg who passed away just over a year ago. wihlborg was a professor of economics and in recent years he worked at chapman university in california but was also partially affiliated with university west.
 lars oxelheim was one of the creators of the conference. here together with mrs lee wohlfert the widow of mr clas wihlborg.
 the conference attracted broad participation from both business and industry such as banks and representatives from international organizations such as the oecds former vice president professor adrian blundell wignall.
 the biggest star
 the conference then offered an intensive program over two days where many different aspects of sustainable financing were addressed. one session for example was devoted to financial stability. among the participants was eugenia kazamaki from the european investment bank head of the small business and innovation advisory projects directorate. kazamaki pointed out that there is now a clear road map for sustainable investment in europe but that there are also many challenges such as the need to work with the rest of the world to achieve sustainability goals. other topics were trade chinas global investment in the socalled belt and road initiative cryptocurrencies and much more.
 from the left susanne arvidsson lunds university and eugenia kazamaki european investment bank.
 hopes for a new conference
 there are high hopes that the conference will survive and continue in the coming years.
 he continues
 therefore we hope that this conference can continue to be arranged and that university west takes an active part in this important topic. happily enough ed altman has also accepted my invitation to visit university west in the future.
 conference theme
 youth moves  voices  spaces subjectivities
 youth studies are critically located within a context of uncertainty. young people are often used as a symbolic space where the hopes anxieties promises and fears of society can be projected and often temporarily resolved. in other words young people are often seen as a cause of social unrest and a threat to the established order. at the same time young people are identified as the future of the nation and subject to a multitude of initiatives to establish and enhance young peoples physical and emotional wellbeing as a strategy to realize their potential. thus an intensified concern over young people is not simply about national hopes and anxieties rather it articulates broader issues of political economic and social cohesion the incapacity of institutions to manage public safety and the delivery of necessary professional services. as such young people are often constituted as operating through a different temporal location that young people have their own rhythms and modes of being in a socially ascribed special place. nyris 2016 uses three keywords to capture some of these transformations and uncertainties in the everyday lives of young people.
 .. signal an interest for young peoples own stories interpretations and actions. we would like to foreground young peoples agency and their possibilities to influence and change society. therefore we will include young people as commentators to the different sessions at the conference.
 .. point not only towards an increasingly globalized world but also towards how identity and subjectivity is anchored formed changed and interpreted in different sociomaterial and symbolic spaces. we would thus like to make room for a discussion about differences and similarities between youth and youth culture and how it is played out and lived in different global national and local contexts.
 inclusion and exclusion within the academy
 consent letter web survey
 how is the study done?
 the benefit of the study is to fill knowledge gaps about exclusion and inclusion within swedish universities and contribute to developing analyzes for inclusion in academic work. the results of the study will also be used locally to develop pedagogical  didactic methods for inclusion at university west.
 what material is collected?
 the purpose of the survey is not to collect information about individuals or events but to see overall patterns.
 the survey includes questions about gender age gender identity religion ethnicity sexual orientation disability inclusion and exclusion.
 your participation in the survey is of course completely voluntary but it is important for the quality and reliability of the survey that as many as possible answer the study. you do not need to state who you are anywhere in the survey and no information about who respond will be saved or available to unauthorized persons. the results will only be presented in a compiled form in such a way that no individual answers can be identified or traced back to a person.
 it is possible to download the speech synthesis tortalk free of charge via university wests website and in this way have the survey read out as a complement to the written text.
 how are my answers protected?
 how is personal data processed?
 request that your personal information be correcte d
 request that the processing of your personal data be restricted
 in certain circumstances the data protection regulation and supplementary national legislation allow for exceptions to th ese rights. for example the right of access to their data may be limited by confidentiality requirements and the right to have data deleted may be limited by rules concerning archiving.if you wish to invoke any of these rights you must contact the data protection officer at university west dataskydd@hv.seif you are dissatisfied with how your personal data is processed you have the right to complain to the privacy protection authority. information about this is available on the authoritys website i my.se.
 participation in the study may risk arousing unpleasant memories and feelings. if you require support after participating in the survey employees at university west are offered conversational support by the occupational health service avonova. you can then contact avonova in trollhättan without having to speak to your boss or another person. avonova is prepared for calls to come. for students student health at university west offers conversational support. both maria blomqvist and anette ryckenberg at the student health have been asked and are prepared for conversations to take place. you can email the student health at studenthalsan@hv.se
 information about the results of the study
 do you have questions about the study please contact
 construction and design of welded components parttime campus kds600
 construction and design of welded components 7.5 hp
 the course will introduce knowledge regarding the advanced design of steel and aluminium welds and related topics
 basic theory of structural systems
 fundamentals of the strength of materials
 joint design for welding and brazing
 basics of weld design
 behaviour of welded structures under different types of loading
 design of welded structures with predominantly static loading
 behaviour of welded structures under cyclic loading
 design of cyclic loaded welded structures
 design of welded pressure equipment
 design of aluminium alloy structures
 introduction to fracture mechanics
 bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering materials engineering marine engineering welding engineering or equivalent. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum 15 he credits in mathematics. english course 6 in the swedish upper secondary school or equivalent.
 asp700advanced welding processes and
 svm610welding metallurgy of advanced material or the equivalent.
 construction start
 construction start for the first subproject in the campus development
 when högskolan västs campus plan 2030 was produced there was a strong desire for a clear main entrance a place for meetings and creativity and a cozier restaurant. the universitys board has now given the green light for the start of construction in the first subproject in the campus development  main entrance with indoor square and restaurant.
 now the first subproject in the campus development becomes real. the first step in the campus development and the continued development of trollhättan as a student and knowledge city. the most important thing is not the building itself but the activities and the collaboration that is made possible says project owner li lejerstedt university director at university west.
 university wests ambition is to be a social actor who together with the society creates knowledge and makes it available to more people. this is mainly done through the universitys profile workintegrated learning ail.
 collaboration therefore runs as a common thread throughout the work with campus plan 2030. the collaboration group includes university west the student union at university west the city of trollhättan the property owner kraftstaden and the municipal housing company eidar.
 the campus plan lays the foundation for our work to create a vivid campus an environment where academia and working life meet and develop together. in this way our collaboration is strengthened. we are developing our campus into a place where staff collaboration partners the public and not least the students thrive and want to be says li lejerstedt.
 the student union at university west has been involved in the project since the start.
 it is great to see that the students input has been valued and will soon become a reality says paulina samuelsson president at the student union.
 the work with campus development is also of great importance for the city of trollhättan.
 the campus plan contributes to making the campus area more integrated with the city center and is in line with the city of trollhättans ambitions to develop the city center. the new main entrance helps to connect the campus and the new drottningtorget says said niklund city manager in the city of trollhättan.
 kraftstaden fastigheter ab is starting up the construction of the main entrance with indoor square and restaurant in september 2021.
 the campus plan was decided by the university board in december 2019.
 consumption and circular material flow
 consumption of products and services makes up a large part of the universitys impact on the climate.
 reducing our carbon footprint requires a transition to a circular approach to procurement and the handling of materials in collaboration with the surrounding community.
 objective the universitys procurement contracts purchases and handling of materials will be carbon neutral or carbon negative by 2045 with emissions so close to zero as possible.
 this objective is achieved through making climate demands when signing procurement contracts and when making purchases handling materials we have purchased with climate in mind and reusing and recycling them after they have served their purpose.
 climate demands are made when signing procurement contracts and making purchases based on a products life cycle from production transportation use and disposal.
 support for making climate and sustainability demands when signing procurement contracts needs to be developed so that it is easy for a purchaser to make climate and sustainability demands when signing contracts both for onceoff purchases and for future contracted ones. it is furthermore important to establish a routine for following up on climate and sustainability demands that serve as the basis for dialogue with suppliers and for future procurement contracts.
 systems for measuring the impact on the climate caused by our consumption will be developed in chosen areas. collaboration within the higher education sector will be pursued.  it is important to find simple models so that the measuring process does not become more important than what we are doing. competence in carbon dioxide budgeting and carbon dioxide followup needs to be built up at our university and built into the system that supports decisionmaking.
 the universitys handling of materials will be circular and based on a circular life cycle perspective.
 this is done by signing contracts for fossilfree materials that can be reused avoiding singleuse materials increasing the lifespan of materials and products that are used establishing systems for reuse and optimizing existing systems for recycling. systems and information about procurement contracts reuse and waste management need to be designed so that they make it easier for employees and students to take personal responsibility and act in a sustainable manner.
 university west is located in central trollhättan. our service center is located on the ground floor of building g and offers service and support to students visitors and employees at the university.
 what can we help you with?
 if you have applied or are planning to apply for a programme at university west you can ask questions about our programmes and admissions or get access to an unfinished course in canvas. you can also book a conversation with our study and career counsellors.
 if you are already a student at university west it will be easier if you enter your username. this will allow us to process your case faster.
 international prospective studentsif you are an international prospective student and interested in studying with us please get in touch with us via study@universitywest.se
 keep in mind that the university is a government agency and that what you write here can become a public document. therefore be careful about writing sensitive or personal questions in the contact form. if you have such a question feel free to call us instead at 46 520 22 30 00. all data is processed in accordance with the general data protection regulation  gdpr.
 username
 which area does your question apply to?
 opening hours
 here you will find the universitys overall opening hours
 more about service center
 this is what the service center helps with
 finding the right place in the universitys premises
 the vest card pass card printing card library card
 study certificate and study information
 mediates contact regarding admission study guidance and educational administration
 contact information service centerservicecenter@hv.sephone 0520223000
 registry official matters
 registration and disclosure of public documents.email registrator@hv.sephone 052022 31 50 weekdays at 9.0012.00.
 ptc centre for production technology
 opening hours entrance doorreception ptc
 monday  friday 7.3016.30we close for lunch 12.0013.00
 production technology centre ptc building 73 nohabgatan 18a trollhättan
 visitors to ptc
 visitors to ptc must register at the reception and have a visible name tag throughout the visit. there is a computer at the reception at ptc where you register and get your name tag.
 all visitors to ptc must have a receiver in place to enter.
 contact the reception on 0520380000email adm.gkn.innovatum@gknaerospace.com
 staff university administration
 staff student support and library
 staff department of engineering science
 staff department of economics and it
 staff department of individual and society
 staff department of health sciences
 finances organization number etc.
 information about payments and einvoices to university west. read more under payments to university west and invoice to university west.
 study counselling and the student health service
 study and career guidance
 general information and contact information
 find study counsellors within your programmesubject area
 student health service
 information about support and service contact information etc.
 restaurants and bookstore
 restaurant västan and the student café.
 here you will find information about the universitys press contacts press images newsletters logos and more.
 press and media.
 information material
 here you will find our print material in digital format
 goods reception
 the universitys delivery address for goods and parcels isgustava melins gata 2 461 32 trollhättan
 the goods reception is openstaffed monday  friday09.0012.00 and 13.0014.30telephone goods reception 0520223980
 related information
 find us
 find your way around campus
 here you will find maps and premises of the campus. restaurant västan entré ail stråket etc.
 our organization
 here you will find information about our organisation and contact details for departments boards and administration among others.
 contact form
 contact us at university west
 send us an email and we will get back to you
 country
 scan this code
 to get to this page or to guide others to this page scan this qr code.
 send us an email
 see our webinars in retrospect
 download our brochure
 download our brochure in pdf and learn more about university west
 how we handle personal data
 read more about gdpr and how we handle your personal data at university west.
 find contact information for the international office
 find contact information to your department coordinator
 continued work with evasys
 work on upgrading the evasys login functions system continues. this means that it is currently not possible to log into the system and work in it. however our automated processes work which means that it is possible to respond to course evaluationssurveys.
 conventional welding processes parttime campus ksp600
 conventional welding processes 7.5 hp
 the course will introduce the knowledge regarding different conventional welding processes and related topics such as
 general introduction to welding technology
 oxygas welding and related processes
 electrotechnics
 the welding arc
 power sources for arc welding
 introduction to gas shielded arc welding
 flux cored arc welding fcaw
 manual metal arc mma welding
 submerged arc welding saw
 resistance welding
 welding laboratory
 cookies are small text files that are used to analyse how visitors use a web page. cookies can not be used to destroy or otherwise harm a visitors computer.
 if you do not want to accept cookies your browser can be set so that you automatically deny cookies storage or get information each time a site requests a cookie to be stored.
 previously stored cookies can also be deleted through the browser. see the browsers help pages for more information. note that if you turn off cookies you may not be able to fully use the sites functionality.
 if you want information from the university west without using the website you are welcome to contact webmaster@hv.se.
 you can streamline your response to submitted work by saving comments you want to be able to reuse in the speedgrader comment library.
 the comments library is inside speedgrader. you can find it by clicking on the small speech bubble just above the comment box in the bar on the right. type a comment in the add comments to library box and click the button below the box to save it.
 a tip is to save comments that function more as templates than as completely finished comments.
 to use a saved comment from the library click on the small speech bubble and on the comment you want to use. it is then added to the comment box for the students submission and you can edit it if necessary before clicking save to send the comment to the student.
 if you want you can activate the show suggestions to get suggested comments without having to click on the speech bubble.
 the comments you have saved are only available to you. it is not possible to share comment libraries with a colleague.
 välj sign in with a work or school account
 godkänn inloggningen med microsoft authenticator
 perhaps you have course materials in a course or in your test course that you want to bring to the new course instance? here is a video that shows how to import materials between courses. the video has english subitles.
 shortcut
 these tips are taken from canvas guides.
 our four core values describe the characteristics of our institution and what defines us who we are how we do things and our unique identity.
 the more people who can share our knowledge the better. all relationships grow in an atmosphere of mutual give and take. therefore we work to be helpful and actively share our knowledge experience and contacts with the surrounding community. we take pride in each others successes and are generous with praise support and encouragement. this can be seen in the relationships between colleagues with students as well as with collaborative partners.
 we strive for the active participation of employees students and collaborative partners. we are open towards the world outside and welcoming to those we interact with and we work to realise the full potential of each individual irrespective of gender age or background. equality and everyones equal value are a given.
 we know that diversity makes us stronger and that interaction and mutual collaboration are the most important factors for success.
 we have a strong incentive to be of influence and involved in the developments taking place in society as well as among individuals. we are responsive courageous and we do not hesitate to take a stand. we welcome new ideas and people who take initiative here. our ambition is always to be at the forefront of our fields of knowledge. therefore we are proactive we get involved and we take responsibility for ensuring that things get done  we do this for our own further development as a university and for the personal growth of our students. this proactiveness also enhances collegiality as well as interactions and collaborations.
 some voices from our staff about the universitys four core values
 corporate finance and equity valuation fulltime campus cfv600
 corporate finance and equity valuation 7.5 hp
 the course combines theory and practice to show a truthful informative picture of the equity asset world. the course supplements students in the third step in the threelevel cfa certification program by integrating both accounting and finance concepts. the course covers a wide range of topics including how an analyst approaches the equity valuation process the basic ddm the derivation of the required rate of return within the context of markowitz and sharpes modern portfolio theory.
 verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english benglish 6 in the swedish upper secondary school or equivalent.
 corporate finance 7.5 hp
 as a twoman partnership on a garage apple computer grew rapidly and by 1985 become a large public traded corporation with 60 millions shares of stocks with a value in excess of 1 billion. at that time the firms more visible cofounder 30yearold steven jobs owned seven million shares of apple stock worth about 120 million. despite his stake in the company and his role in its founding and success jobs was forced to abandon operating responsibilities in 1985 when apples financial performance turned unpleasant and he subsequently resigned altogether. but in 1997 apples future was still in doubt and the company hired him back and his ability to turn apple around was so miraculous. understanding jobs journey from garagebases entrepreneur to corporate executive to exemployee and back takes us to the essence of corporate finance. imagine you were to start your own business. no matter what type you started you would have to answer the following three questions in some form or another
 what longterm investments should you take on? that is what lines of business will you be in and what sorts of buildings machinery and equipment will you need. this is capital budgeting.
 where will you get the longterm financing to pay for your investment? will you bring in other owners or will you borrow the money. that is capital structure.
 how will you manage your everyday financial activities such as collecting from customers and paying suppliers? that is working capital.
 the main goal of this intermediate course is to study ways to answer the above three questions.
 economics basic level 225 he credits
 costeffective exterior brazing technique for vehicles
 cost of living  bank account
 cost of living
 living costs in sweden are similar to most european countries and depend largely on your individual lifestyle. the estimated cost of living for a student is around 8000 sek swedish krona per month.
 visit study in swedens cost of living in sweden page as a guide. please note that as a student in sweden you have to buy your own text books. this cost varies from course to course.
 student discounts are given at numerous shops stores cafés etc. in our area. you need to be a member of the student union in order to get the discounts. the student union at university west has more information about membership and student discounts.
 please also note that when applying for a residence permit you must prove to the swedish migration agency that you will have sufficient funds to continue supporting yourself for the remaining study period.
 here you can download statement of cost if needed.
 currency
 how to manage your finances in sweden
 if you are staying in sweden for a shorter period one semester or less we recommend you use a credit card that is accepted internationally for economic transactions in sweden. credit cards are commonly used everywhere.
 how to open a bank account
 if you are a student staying in sweden for at least one year we recommend you open a bank account in one of the banks represented in the city.
 the process of opening a bank account is complicated and you can prepare for it by talking to your home bank asking what they need for you to be able to transfer money etc.
 the banks in sweden have no possibilities to administer cash  therefore it is recommended that you transfer funds from your home bank once your swedish account is opened. be aware that it may take up to 10 weekdays to open a swedish bank account.for some citizens outside eu iran pakistan etc. it is very difficult to transfer money due to different eu directives and sanctions. if its possible talk to someone with experience in these matters before you travel here.
 bank information in 21 different languages
 message archive
 course evaluations at university west
 after each course you as a student have the opportunity to submit comments on the course. the course evaluation is reached via canvas after the end of the course.
 course evaluations are an important part of the universitys quality work. your opinions are valuable for the development of the course and the universitys continuous desire to improve the quality of our education. when evaluating keep in mind to focus on the course as a whole. opinions on courses are welcomed but must be kept factual and within our common values.
 are you satisfied with the course? yes no
 what was good about the course? text
 what can be improved in the course? free text
 later this fall teachers will have the opportunity to add their own coursespecific questions to the course evaluation. after completing the course evaluation the course coordinator writes a comment on received comments and how the course can be developed on the canvas page of the course.
 course examination and what happens after
 students needs related to examination
 assessment of examining tasks is part of our exercise of authority. we need to inform and explain this to the students. we need to make it clear to the students that examinations are partly a learning opportunity and that they should also make it possible to judge whether the student has achieved the courses learning objectives. we need to discuss what counts as cheating  plagiarism and what the consequences may be. we need to be very clear and factual in order to guarantee a legal process. there are general rules for examining a course at university west.
 examination and assessment
 you need to describe the examination forms that appear in the course. students need to know if they should register for examinations and reexaminations and if so how and when and how the exam will take place.
 inform
 how the assessment will take place especially how individual assessment is done in examinations carried out in groups
 what marks a failed approved or wellapproved examination assignment
 in what way feedback will be given after the examination
 what happens if the student fails in the examination
 what rules and procedures apply to reexamination. for example is the possibility of continuing the studies affected  what does a failed result mean for the opportunities for promotion within the program?
 in the examination itself the instructions must clarify what is expected. how should the text be structured? what is meant by instructions that describe analyze discuss refer figure etc. often more instructions are needed than the purely formal ones such as line spacing etc.
 after the course ends
 feedback on examination results
 in our feedback on examinations it is crucial that we clarify strengths and shortcomings. this can be done partly during a joint examination review and partly in individual feedback in writing or orally to the student. we are happy to exemplify with unidentified excerpts from examinations and give examples of how the presentation could be developed. also remember to inform about
 opportunities for reexamination
 what kind of student support that the university offers  for example followup talks with study and career counselors conversation with the student health funka  support for the disabled support with academic writing at language resource center and support with maths at math help center.
 a collegewide dialogue  between teachers and students  creates the conditions for finding a functioning and effective timely working method for utilizing students and teachers experiences from courses. the purpose of the course evaluations is to take advantage of these experiences.
 the students shall have the right to exert influence over the education at the universities.the universities shall work to ensure that the students take an active part in the work on further developing the education. sfs 19921434 1 kap.  4 lagändring 2000260
 higher education ordinance on course evaluationsthe university shall give the students who participate in or have completed a course an opportunity to express their experiences of and views on the course through a course evaluation organized by the university. the university shall compile the course evaluations and provide information on the results and any decisions on measures that are the result of the course evaluations. the results should be made available to the students. sfs 1993100 1 kap.  14 lagändring 2000651
 make a course evaluation
 according to högskolelagen all institutions of higher education must give students the opportunity to express their experiences and opinions through course evaluations. the university compiles the course evaluations and informs the students about the results and any decisions about measures.
 the universitys quality council has agreed on a common course evaluation template. it contains a universitywide part and a part with departmentspecific questions where the students have the opportunity to submit their views. after the course evaluation a course evaluation response must be written and communicated to the students. the course evaluation response is published by the course supervisor no later than 5 weeks after the end of the course.
 read more here in swedish
 tips for course evaluations
 halftime tips  do a midterm evaluation create a good dialogue
 to create good conditions for getting a high response rate in the course evaluation at the end it is recommended to do a midterm evaluation after about half the course. by being responsive to the students improvement tips a good dialogue and work  study environment is created. this does not mean that the teacher should always do what the students want but to have a constructive dialogue.
 midevaluations can be done in many different ways below are various suggestions
 allow 30 minutes for center evaluation. appoint a student who writes on the board and one who writes on paper or on a computer  tablet  mobile. divide the board into three fields. enter positive  strengths in the first field should change  develop in the second field and improvement suggestions in the third field. explain that you want them to have a dialogue and write down what they agree on. the student at the board leads the discussion and notes on the board. for each should be changed  developed a concrete improvement proposal must be produced. let the students discuss for 15 minutes alone. after 15 minutes the teacher returns. go through the strengths of the course so you understand what the students mean. do the same with change and improvement suggestions. ask so you understand. do not value and do not go into defense. listen and provide constructive feedback. when the discussion is complete ask to have the documentation of the student who was selected to take notes. evaluation dialogue feedback and documentation completed in 30 minutes.
 do the exact same arrangement as above 1 but ask the students to feedback via digital questionnaire. digital feedback in the learning platform or at the next course opportunity.
 do the exact same arrangement as 1 but ask a colleague to discuss the group. set aside time to discuss improvement suggestions with your colleague.
 tips for conducting course evaluation in order to create good basis for development and improvement
 have evaluation at the very last time. experience from other universities shows that any free text responses are more constructive and clear.
 add your own questions related to the course opportunity and the course structure.
 think about how you will handle the answers. dont ask unnecessary things that cant be changed or that arent relevant.
 remember not to have too many questions
 do not ask for things that you cannot  do not want to change. it creates unnecessary frustration.
 return the result to the student group orally at the last occasion.
 tips for increasing student response rate
 the results of the evaluation must play a role it is important that the students see that their views are used.
 write a course report and respond to the students values in a constructive and developing way. give concrete suggestions for changes or give clear reasons why some changes will not be made.
 publish the course report on the program pages in the learning platform.
 for students to feel motivated to respond the course evaluation needs to be anonymous perceived as meaningful and voluntary.
 early alert
 early alert is a student support measure aimed at early in the course of study capturing students who for various reasons have received few or no higher education credits in their program.
 the study counsellors have produced a document that you as the programme manager can use in contact with students who have few or no results from the first semester. the letter aims to get students to contact study counselors if they need support or report study interruptions. the benefit for you as a teacher is to get an overview of active students which also benefits remaining students in the program.
 below you will find the letter you can use. contact your study counsellor if you have questions about content or how to best adapt it to your student group.
 we miss you
 electrical engineering
 course in power system voltage stability
 the gigantic energy transition that is now underway means major challenges for our power system but also new challenges for electricity grid companies that have been given increased responsibility for eu common grid codes. together with chalmers we provide a 3day course in power system voltage stability on 35 june 2024.
 the ongoing energy transition implies significant challenges for our power systems. to really understand the changes going on possibilities and limitations for different future technology directions and the abilities also in the future to provide a stable and robust power system it is essential to understand the different forms of power system stability.
 university west and chalmers university of technology will therefore give a series of courses about power system stability. starting june 35 2024 at chalmers in gothenburg with the course in voltage stability.
 the sessions will be conducted by specialized university teachers and experts from the industry. for the first three days in june 2024 the focus will be on lectures but also laboratory demonstrations and psse calculations and simulations will be included.
 we also plan to visit a local production plant. for a deeper understanding homework assignments involving psse calculations and simulations will be offered. for these assignments there will be support possibilities via teams or zoom and in the autumn there will be a closing seminar where the assignments and solutions are presented and discussed. for phd students the course will give course credits that will depend on how many assignments that has been performed.
 since june is the perfect time for a visit to gothenburg there will be activities also in the evenings.take this unique opportunity to learn more about power system stability meet new and old colleagues and enjoy gothenburg
 starting time june 3 2024ending time june 5 2024location chalmers gothenburg possibility to also participate via teamszoomsuitable for power system engineers working in the power industry phdstudents and lecturers in nordic universitieslanguage englishlecturers evert agneholm daniel karlsson lena max and massimo bongiornocourse fee 11 900 sek exkl. moms. teachers and ph. d. students at universities pay a reduced fee of 1000 sek excl. vatregistration and questions evert.agneholm@hv.se 46 732 498920last day for registration may 6 2024
 s1 welcome and introduction  massimo bongiorno evert agneholm daniel karlsson and lena max. introduction to the subject in general and with focus on voltage stability introduction of the participants and lecturers.general aspects of electric power systems cwt 1s2 what is voltage stability cwt 2s3 transmission system reactive power compensation cwt 3s4 power system loads cwt 4s5 synchronous generation characteristics cwt 5s6 renewable generation characteristicss7 battery energy storage characteristics and uses8 grid code requirements impact on voltage stabilitys9 simulation of equivalent systems cwt 6s10 voltage stability of a large system cwt 7s11 voltage stability with hvdc links and facts devices cwt 8s12 power system planning and operating guidelines cwt 9s13 power system planning and operation  example from swedens14 voltage stability incidents in sweden 1983 and 2003s15 voltage stability incidents in other systemss16 wide area protection schemes to counteract voltage instabilitys17 phasor measurements  analysiss18 studying voltage stability using psses19 demonstration of voltage stability in lab environment using a synchronous machine and a physical modelling of a transmission lines20 delivery and review of the assignments mainly for ph. d. studentss21 invited speakerss22 study visit at a production plants23 summary conclusions course evaluation discussioncwt x refers to chapter x in the course book.literature book power system voltage stability by carson w. taylor reports papers and ppt presentations.teachers prof. daniel karlsson prof. evert agneholm dr. lena max and prof. massimo bongiorno.
 business economics and it
 evaluation of it systems 7.5 hp
 finance and politics 7.5 hp
 glocal challenges and applied approaches to sustainable development 15 hp
 international economics 7.5 hp
 international law and organizations 7.5 hp
 introduction to political thought 15 hp
 investment analysis and portfolio management 7.5 hp
 security studies 7.5 hp
 system development for mobile applications ii 7.5 hp
 work integrated societal studies 15 hp
 financial reporting and analysis 7.5 hp
 firm internationalization 7.5 hp
 fixed income fundamentals and derivatives 7.5 hp
 international management 7.5 hp
 international marketing 7.5 hp
 portfolio management and alternative investment 7.5 hp
 finite element method mathematical formulation and applications 5 hp
 freeform modeling and assemblies 7.5 hp
 guidelines for safety when working on and in electric vehicles 2.5 hp
 introduction to electric vehicle systems and components 5 hp
 introduction to programming with python 5 hp
 logic control engineering 2.5 hp
 logistics 5 hp
 manufacturing i 2.5 hp
 mathematical statistics 5 hp
 network technology for iot and industrial communicaiton 7.5 hp
 robotics and automation 5 hp
 sensor technology 2.5 hp
 server administration 7.5 hp
 strength of materials 7.5 hp
 virtual production 5 hp
 virtual servers and storage systems 7.5 hp
 cyberphysical systems security 7.5 hp
 electric machines for electric vehicles 7.5 hp
 electromagnetic compatibility 2.5 hp
 feedback control advanced course 7.5 hp
 humanai interaction 7.5 hp
 industrial automation 3.5 hp
 introduction to artificial intelligence and machine learning 7.5 hp
 manufacturing optimisation 5 hp
 mechatronics for automation 3.5 hp
 operations and supply chain management 15 hp
 operations strategy and execution 7.5 hp
 phase transformations in metals and alloys 3.5 hp
 power electronics 5 hp
 principles of cybersecurity 7.5 hp
 privacy law policy and compliance in cybersecurity 7.5 hp
 process simulation and modeling 7.5 hp
 programming for automation 4 hp
 robot certificate 1.5 hp
 robotic simulation 6 hp
 scientific methods in robotics and automation 3 hp
 sensor technology and image analysis 7.5 hp
 software analysis and design 7.5 hp
 statistical process control and design of experiments 7.5 hp
 supply chain management  sourcing and distribution 7.5 hp
 surface engineering 7.5 hp
 welding metallurgy of ironbased alloys 6 hp
 social and behavioural studies
 english level 130 language awareness and language proficiency 15 hp
 english level 130 literature and culture 15 hp
 english level 3160 language structure and language variation 15 hp
 english level 3160 literary history and intertextuality 15 hp
 intercultural work psychology 15 hp
 language culture and communication in sweden 7.5 hp
 financial institutions and risk management 7.5 hp
 international politics and globalization 7.5 hp
 macro theory 7.5 hp
 micro theory 7.5 hp
 sustainability and contemporary political thought 7.5 hp
 sweden in a postcolonial world 7.5 hp
 international finance 7.5 hp
 international perspectives on management control systems 7.5 hp
 knowledge development in international firms 7.5 hp
 ethics for engineers 2.5 hp
 feedback control engineering 5 hp
 manufacturing processes 7.5 hp
 materials science and engineering 7.5 hp
 mathematics a 7.5 hp
 mathematics b 7.5 hp
 mechanics 7.5 hp
 technical drawing and cad 5 hp
 thermodynamics and heat transfer mathematical formulation and analytic solution 5 hp
 fatigue and fracture mechanics 6 hp
 knowledge management in supply chain management 7.5 hp
 machine vision 3 hp
 materials characterization and testing 3.5 hp
 metallurgy of welding and additive manufacturing 7.5 hp
 quality control in welding applications 6 hp
 simulation of automated production 3 hp
 systems and control 7.5 hp
 thermal spraying 6 hp
 welding in practice 3 hp
 welding metallurgy of advanced material 7.5 hp
 welding processes 6 hp
 how to combine your courses
 you can choose from a full semester course packages or single subject courses during your exchange period.
 if you select single subject courses it is important to know when during the semester they run and at what study pace. we recommend selecting full semester course package to avoid any schedule conflicts.
 helpful tools academic calendar and course offer overviewbelow you can find an academic calendar which lists the study weeks and the dates included in each of these so you can see when in the semester your chosen courses run i.e. during which weeks.
 in the course offer overview all our courses and course packages are listed showing how they run during autumn or spring semester  so that you can better understand how to combine them.
 importantdo not combine two courses that runs during the same period unless they are given as a package. the schedules will most likely collide.
 course offer overview
 link to online course lists
 course syllabus  third cycle
 courses for professionals
 free courses tailored for those working in the industry designed so that you can work while studying. through professional development initiatives both you and the industry can evolve in line with a changing world.
 these courses are developed to help the industry meet the challenges of tomorrow. the course content is created in collaboration with the business sector and tailored to strengthen the skills within the industry. the courses enhance your professional role giving you the opportunity to share experiences with other professionals.
 lacking formal university qualifications?
 even if you dont have formal qualifications such as grades or diplomas you may still possess the knowledge that meets the course entry requirements. we apply validation of work experience which means we can assess your competence based on both formal qualifications and work experience.
 courses tailored for professionals
 short courses in production technology sustainability and digitalization  mainly conducted in swedish.
 short courses in electrical engineering  mainly conducted in english.
 organization and leadership
 short courses in organization and leadership  mainly conducted in swedish
 teaching  learning in higher education
 courses in higher education pedagogy
 the higher education pedagogical courses are designed for those working at university west and are tailored to allow you to pursue your professional development studies concurrently with your work.
 starting in 2024 all courses in university pedagogy will be certificategranting and their duration will be presented in weeks instead of credits. the reason for this change is that the swedish national audit office requires that courses targeting teaching staff such as internal professional development initiatives should not be financed by government appropriations. through this change we will align our course management with several other educational institutions in sweden. as a participant there will be no change for you and as before you will find your results in ladok after completing the course along with a certificate of completion.
 higher education pedagogical courses employ formative assessment based on your active participation. it is important to coordinate with your department head to ensure that you have time in your work schedule to participate and complete the course when it is offered. to facilitate your planning the majority of scheduled activities will take place on friday afternoons. the exact schedule with days and times can be found for each course.
 all our courses are conducted in swedish. for our englishspeaking staff there is an opportunity to study higher education pedagogy at the pil unit at the university of gothenburg. you can find more information about it here.
 strategic flexibility and lifelong learning
 there is a distinction between pedagogical and strategic flexibility. when discussing strategic flexibility it must be predictable so that prospective applicants are aware of the conditions for participating in a course it is only then that it becomes strategic in nature. this means that the rules that apply to the course or program are known to everyone establishing the framework we adhere to.
 all our higher education pedagogical courses are designed for working professionals who need to combine their participation and studies with other responsibilities. it is therefore crucial that we are completely transparent regarding the prerequisites and conditions for our entire offering i.e. days times conditions for participation and examination criteria are presented before one applies.
 hyflex definition for higher education pedagogical courses at university west
 the majority of activities are designed so that work can take place on campus or digitally.
 the quality for all participants should be equivalent.
 since the interaction with colleagues on the course and the teachers is at the core of the university pedagogical activities offering asynchronous participation for the moments where learning occurs in interaction with others becomes counterproductive.
 exceptions to hyflex are made at the course level when it is pedagogically justified meaning that certain individual moments are of such a nature that they cannot be conducted in a blended format but only on campus or digitally. the conditions are carefully presented before participants apply for the course so that they are aware of when this occurs.
 national goals for credentialing higher education pedagogical education
 the participant must
 independently and collaboratively plan implement and evaluate teaching and assessment on a scientific or artistic basis within their own area of expertise.
 be able to use and contribute to the development of physical and digital learning environments to promote the learning of groups and individuals.
 be able to engage with students in an inclusive manner and have knowledge of regulations and support for students with disabilities.
 be able to use relevant national and local regulations as well as discuss societys goals for higher education and academic teaching in relation to their own practice and students participation in education.
 demonstrate a reflective approach to their own academic teaching the relationship with students and the values of higher education such as democracy internationalization gender equality nondiscrimination and sustainability.
 courses offered
 courses at university west
 on these pages you find information about our courses offered to exchange students. all courses listed on these pages are taught in english.
 fulltime studies in sweden means that you study 30 higher education credits he credits per semester. 1 he credit is equal to 1 ects credits.
 academic year  setupeach academic year comprises of two semesters each 20 weeks long and divided into two study periods. each study period is 10 weeks long which means that you study 15 credits during one study period if you study fulltime.
 study pacea single subject course can run at different paces normally either at fulltime or at parttime.
 7.5 credit course with study pace fulltime will run for 5 weeks
 7.5 credit course with study pace parttime 50 will run for 10 weeks
 information in course listin the course lists below you can find information on both the study pace and during which time the course runs.
 read more on how to combine courses here
 third cycle
 ethnographic methods 7.5 hp
 qualitative content analysis 4 hp
 scientific work in work integrated learning 7.5 hp
 strategic career planning in phd education via workintegrated learning 5 hp
 teaching and learning in higher education for thirdcycle student 2.5 hp
 5year planning of compulsory courses
 long term planning of compulsary courses 20212026 eng_210909.pdf
 grade is a national graduate school for digital technologies in education with particular interest in the digitization that takes place within the pre primary and secondary schools and the leisure center.grade graduate school link to other website
 production 2030  a national graduate school within the framework of the strategic innovation program for sustainable production.production 2030 graduate school link to other website
 signup for covid19 vaccination information
 please register here if you would like to get support and more information on how to get vaccinated for covid19 in sweden as international student.
 signup for more information please register here so you can get more information on how to book an appointment for the vaccination within short.
 select an option
 i have received my first vaccination in my home country?
 if yes when should you receive your second vaccination?
 if you have been vaccinated in your home country which vaccine have you received?
 join this 5th international conference where international experts unite to discuss cracking phenomena  associated with welding and additive manufacturing. welcome to us at university west in trollhättan on march 1214 2025
 about the conference
 this is the 5th conference on cracking phenomena in welding and additive manufacturing that follows four successful events in 2004 2007 2010 and 2014.
 the purpose of the conference is to gather international experts to discuss cracking phenomena associated with welding and additive manufacturing from both a scientific and practical standpoint.
 topics include solidification and liquation cracking ductilitydip cracking reheat and stressrelief cracking hydrogeninduced cracking weldability testing simulation and modeling measurement and quantification and remedial measures.
 peerreviewed proceedings of the workshop will be published. proceedings from previous conferences have been highly cited and are valuable resources for engineers and scientists.
 five top notch keynote speakers are confirmed. read more
 for whom?
 submission of abstracts
 where?
 university west is located in the city of trollhättan sweden. the town is beautifully situated along the göta river and has a rich history of industry and innovation and is today home to many large medium and small manufacturing companies. getting here
 how much?
 the registration fee is 3500 sek 300 euro which includes a copy of the proceedings lunches a cocktail reception and postworkshop tour. the fee for students who are currently enrolled at a university is 1750 sek 150 euro.
 the conference registration is open from 7th july 2024. register now
 prof. emeritus john c. lippold the ohio state university usaprof. carolin fink the ohio state university usadr. elin m. westin voestalpine böhler welding austriaprof. maria asuncion valiente bermejo university west sweden
 university west is hosting the conference this year and the ohio state university voestalpine böhler welding and the international institute of welding are coorganizing.
 at the university west we have had a lightboard studio for some time where you can easily record video material.
 a lightboard is a kind of whiteboard with led lights that allows teachers to write and draw while speaking to the camera providing an interactive and visually stimulating learning experience for students.
 you can use our lightboard in two ways you can record your lectures and then share them with the students on canvas or you can use the lightboard studio in a zoom meeting and conduct the lecture directly for the students who are present.
 in a study shows that the use of a lightboard can be an effective way to create engaging educational material. in an article from the journal of chemical education in 2020 the authors examined the effect of lightboards on students learning and engagement in organic chemistry. the results showed that students who watched educational videos created with lightboards had higher levels of engagement and understanding than students who watched traditional whiteboard videos.
 link to the article
 journal of chemical education  adopting lightboard for a chemistry flipped classroom to improve technologyenhanced videos for better learner engagement.
 if you want to try using our lightboard studio book an ict hour with one of our ict educational developers.
 read more about the lightboard studio at university west.
 order it account
 university west computer account
 if you are an incoming exchange student and you will not take part of any classes during your stay you will need help on getting an account setup for university west it services and computer login during your stay.
 all students at university west will need to have a computer account set up in order to access computers and facilities on our premises.
 in order for you to create your account at university west we will first need you to enter your details in the form below and submit this to us.
 you will then receive a notification by email with instructions on how to proceed to create your account.
 account setup
 last name family name
 start of stay
 end of stay
 creating change together
 creating change together.
 this is how we see it
 but to meet the challenges of the future we need new ways of thinking cooperating and solving problems. that is why university west is willing to leave what is familiar and look for solutions where other universities do not.
 through the way we collaborate with business the public sector and civil society we open new doors to knowledge even outside the walls of the university. with our pedagogical method workintegrated learning we give our students the opportunity to access knowledge and skills found outside our classrooms and lecture halls.
 together we can create real change.
 on february 15th akademus organized a lunch seminar where the topic was how we can create images with the aid of generative ai.
 erik malmsköld presented his thoughts regarding when it is appropriate to use generative ai to create images and when it might be unwise. during the seminar we also witnessed a demonstration in which we generated images using the tools microsoft copilot and openai dalle via chatgpt4.
 the video provides an overview of the presentation from the lunch seminar. the services discussed for generating images were microsoft copilot dalle adobe firefly meta ai midjourney and google gemini.
 this film demonstrates how we proceed to prompt images in two different tools.
 to prompt images refers to the process of creating a detailed description or instruction that an imagegenerating ai such as dalle uses to produce an image. this description known as a prompt contains specific details about what the image should depict including subject environment style colors and any special effects or emotions that the image should convey.
 creative and flexible campus
 this is how we describe a creative  flexible campus
 creative and flexible campus  one of the impact targets in the campus development
 here you find information about the other impact targets.
 credit transfer
 as a student at university west you have the right to apply for crediting of former education. if you have completed studies in sweden or abroad that you consider correspond to a course or part of a course a course module at university west you can apply for a credit transfer. double degree students must apply for credit transfer of the previous courses from their home universities to have them included in the university west degree. if you have questions about how it works you are welcome to contact the degree office.
 apply in ladok
 you must be admitted to and pursue studies at the university west for the credit transfer to be assessed. you apply for the credit transfer in ladok. log in to your page at ladok for students and follow the instructions.
 if you for some reason dont have an account in ladok you can apply with a form that you find below. be sure to submit the required documents.
 send the application documents to examen@hv.se or to
 the decision will be sent to the email address registered in ladok unless you have informed us otherwise. if your application is granted the credit transfer will be registered in ladok.
 please note that it is not possible to use the same course several times to transfer credits to courses that shall be included in the same degree.
 when you contact the degree office we process your personal information such as civic number contact details or notes about previous studies. all data is processed according to the general data protection regulation  gdpr.
 read more about gdpr and how we handle your personal data university west  general data protection regulationgdpr hv.se.
 application for credit transfer for full course
 application for credit transfer for module
 application for advance notification of credit transfer
 if something happens  here you find information on how to act in different situations.
 important telephone numbers in case of an emergency or crisis
 here you will find important telephone numbers to use if an emergency or crisis arises within hv.
 call 112 in urgent emergency situations in the event of danger to life property or the environment.
 an emergency is when you quickly need help from an ambulance emergency services police air sea mountain rescue priest on duty or poison information.
 when you raise the alarm in the event of an urgent threat or violent situation  remember
 talk about what has happened
 tell us your own name and phone number
 answer any additional questions from sos alarm
 about the emergency number 112 at sos alarm
 emergency numbers at university west
 day timehögskolan västservice center 0520  22 30 00weekdays mondaythursday 8001630 fridays 1600
 property helpline kraftstaden 0520340 50in case of urgent property faults and damage
 if an attack were to take place
 the advice in the event of an attack is to follow the three steps run hide tell.
 put yourself in safety. leave the place as quickly and safely as possible and avoid crowds.
 hide find cover  if escape is not possible
 if you are unable to leave the area find a place that you deem safe and that will provide you with protection. pay attention to what you see and hear and try to remain calm. put the mobile phone on silent and turn off the vibration. do not call anyone who may be in the danger zone. the mobile signal can reveal a person who is hiding.
 tell call the emergency services
 when you are safe call the police via 112. the police need to know the location what has happened how many perpetrators you have seen what weapons they used what they look like and where you last saw them. warn those in danger and help those in need.
 ambulance fire brigade police  in emergency situations call 112
 inform about what has happened
 say your own name and phone number
 please answer any additional questions from sos alarm
 see the video from msb run  hide  tell
 web training how you ought to act in the event of a terrorist attack
 msb and the police have developed an online training course to increase knowledge of how to stay safe as well as how to help others in a dangerous situation such as a terrorist attack. the training takes 1530 minutes to complete.
 to the web training how you should act in the event of a terrorist attack
 in case of fire alarm
 exit through the nearest exit
 do not use the elevator
 assembling pointcampus we gather in maria alberts park the park outside albertsalenassembling point in case of fire.here you find a map with assembling place on campusptc assembling point at the blue sign at the car park outside the entrance nohabgatan 18 a on the other side of the pedestrian crossing. if you have visitors make sure they accompany you to the assembly point.
 property problems or damages
 report to the service center.acute property problems when the service center is closed please contact kraftstaden service number 0520340 50
 inform if something happens
 in the case of an emergency or accident where it is a matter of saving lives  call 112 first.
 if an event or accident has occurred that you think the university needs to be informed about we would be grateful if you would report this. if this happens during the day contact servicecenter.
 at other times contact the universitys crisis number staffed 24 hours a day
 crisis number 052022 3200
 let us know what has happened and if you know who or whom it concerns. other information such as time contact information is also valuable.
 information about
 heart starter machine
 here you find our heart starter machine
 in case of fire
 this is what you do
 if you detect a fire
 warn others
 assist others that are in immediate danger as long as you do not expose yourself to risks
 call the emergency number 112
 extinguish the fire if possible but without taking unnecessary risks.
 close the doors to prevent the fire from spreading
 evacuate via the nearest exit  assembly point in maria alberts park see link aboveremember to pay attention to evacuation plans and the nearest emergency exit.
 remember that fire smoke is toxic  get out safely by crawling along the floor.
 close the doors behind you when you go out to reduce the spread of smoke and fire.
 when sos answers 112 they want to know
 what has happened?
 where did the accident happen?
 what phone number are you calling from?
 what is your name?
 fire extinguishers in the universitys premises
 fire extinguishers are deployed at strategic locations and are marked out in the evacuation plan.
 to the film in case of fire.
 if a student suffers an injuryaccident or incident it is important that a report is made. the information in the notification is the basis for the measures to be taken and who is responsible for them.
 students are insured via the kammarkollegiet and can contact the student health with questions.
 incidentan incident is an event that could lead to an accident or ill health. it is important that incidents are reported so that preventive measures can be taken. head of department is responsible for students.
 report accidentincidentinjury pdf opens in new window
 due to the security situation in sweden
 the swedish government and the swedish security servicehave raised the terror threat level from level 3 to level 4. university west follows and refers to the recommendations found on the msb and the swedish security service websites. read more on the web page due to raised terror threat level.
 how to report accidentinjuryincident log in is required
 what is your responsibility if something happens login is required
 action plan threats and violence
 to the action plan in swedish login is required
 critical events values and national identity
 the kvnprojects overall purpose is to investigate the role of religion belief and values in the process of ongoing formation of national identities in the context of critical events in multicultural societies.
 the terror attacks of 22.07.2011 will be used as a case of critical events with relevance beyond the norwegian context. correspondingly the first specific aim is to perform indepth analyzes of a responses to 22.07.2011 in the messages from memorial sites in oslo and utvika collected and preserved by the national archives of norway and of b focus group interviews performed 2014 with swedish and norwegian upper secondary students as well as with informants from their parent generation. on the basis of this first aim the second specific aim is to contribute to theoretical perspectives regarding collective memory and national identity formation and to discuss use of the messages as learning material in school when values are on the agenda.
 the datasets consist of a the 15 000 memorial messages from oslo and utvika collected shortly after 22.07.2011 and b data produced four and five years later by interviews in sweden and norway with upper secondary school students and informants of their parent generation. this combination gives unique possibilities to compare understandings and interpretations regarding religions beliefs and values over time in different agegroups and across a national border. the combined datasets can be seen as partial expressions of norwegian and swedish collective memories essential for construction of national identities in societies characterized by cultural complexity.
 while several projects study critical events focusing trauma related to victimsrelatives the rvnprojects focus is on expressions of religion and values related to the critical event and to breiviks ideology as expressed in the memorial messages and how the event and its relevance today is interpreted and understood by young people and persons belonging to their parental generation some years after the event.
 participating reseracher at university west
 prof. sidsel lied hedmark university college hamar norwayprof. geir skeie stavanger university and stockholm universityassociate prof. hans lödén karlstad university swedenphd student sidsel undseth bakke stavanger university norway
 senior professor
 critical perspectives on noncritical adhd diagnostics of children and young people
 this project analyze how online information concerning adhd is presented to parents in usa.
 elisabeth punzi university of gothenburg
 erlandsson s. lundin l.  punzi e. 2016. a discoursive analysis concerning information on adhd presented to parents by the national institute of mental health usa. int j qual stud health  wellbeing 11 30938
 erlandsson s.  punzi e. 2016. challenging the adhd consensus. in j qual stud health  wellbeing 11 31124
 cromm  creation of muscle manikin
 fraunhofer chalmers center
 cryogenic assited machining
 andreas gustafsson
 cse community service engineering
 cuttingedge education for a sustainable industrial transition
 industrys major technological challenges require new expertise within a range of areas. university west is meeting this demand with new masters programmes and courses designed for professionals and new students alike.
 as the manufacturing industry makes the transition towards more sustainable production the ways in which companies work are changing in every respect  from production technology processes to business management. university west is launching several new programmes to meet these significant challenges within industry. six new one and twoyear masters programmes are currently being prepared to begin in autumn 2022 with even more planned for autumn 2023.
 today technological developments are moving incredibly quickly within the manufacturing industry notes per nylén head of the department of engineering science at university west. the businesses we work with are struggling to find the right expertise within fields such as automation digitalisation cybersecurity and the development of electric vehicles.
 we are involved in ongoing dialogue with the universitys industrial partners to match their need for expertise with new cuttingedge education courses and commissioned education for both new students and professionals within industry.
 the digitalisation of industry brings new demands in terms of how work is managed and organised adds thomas winman head of the school of business economics and it. there are also growing demands for processes and products to be characterised by sustainability  both on an overall level and in terms of individuals professional roles.
 companies need new strategies and capabilities as working methods communication forms and management are undergoing fundamental changes within digitalised organisations.
 this is true not least of businesses that operate in an international context explains thomas. here employees come together from different cultures with different perspectives of what constitutes a sustainable organisation.
 based on industrys need for expertise we have devised two unique masters programmes sustainable development and leadership in digitalised organisations. both are relevant to several different professional categories since sustainability affects all employees within an organisation.
 several new programmes at secondcycle level are due to be ready for launch within two years. an eagerly awaited masters programme in electric vehicle engineering began in september and the following programmes will be offered in autumn 2022
 master in ai and automation
 master in production management
 master in cybersecurity
 master in autonomous vehicles
 master in sustainable development
 master in leadership in digitalised organisations
 the journey towards more sustainable production also needs to take place in a sustainable manner says per. after all this is a matter of lifelong learning. we have therefore worked closely with our industrial partners to develop a flexible education concept which enables existing employees to combine skills development with their regular work. the concept has proved extremely effective.
 find out more about the educational concept for skills development
 since the demand for new knowledge is so great universities need to work together  not least to meet the automotive industrys pressing need to make the transition from fossil fuels to electricity.
 together we can meet industrys need for skills in a better way concludes per. we complement each other with our different areas of expertise and we can be involved in each others programmes. using everything we have learnt within digital education will provide a successful model for cooperation.
 swedens leading university for work integrated learning wil.
 nine out of ten students find jobs within 11½ years.
 find out more hv.seeducation
 for more information
 per nylén head of the department of engineering science
 thomas winman head of the school of business economics and it
 cwihe  european network of cooperative education
 we urge all employees and students to be extra vigilant against cyber attackers in light of the recent cyber attacks targeted towards swedish authorities. be wary of messages that
 ask you to give away your password.
 ask you to click on unknown links.
 ask you to verify your account information.
 threaten to shut down your account within a short period of time.
 if you suspect that your password has been compromised change it immediately in mittkonto and report it to the service center.
 cyberphysical systems security parttime campus scs600
 the course focuses on main cybersecurity aspects of areas such as
 internet of things iot
 industrial internet
 smart cities
 smart grid and smart anything e.g. cars buildings homes manufacturing hospitals appliances.
 the students are introduced to the concepts of general security architecture network security and cyber physical security. importance of continuous assessment of security threats and the countermeasures is emphasized. notion of physical logical and organizational security is provided. leading industrial communication standards are covered both theoretically and practically.
 bachelor of science in computer science informatics computer engineering information technology or equivalent. additionally verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english 6 in the swedish upper secondary school high school or equivalent.
 kursinformation
 virtual reality augmented reality mixed reality presence immersive computation informationsvisualisering
 practical mixing of virtual and real
 visualizing invisible environmental data in vr  development and implementation of design concepts for communicating urban air quality in a virtual city model
 mind tricks for presence
 thomas lundqvist
 5th semester of regular studies
 czech republicvsb  technical university of ostrava
 spaincarlos iii university of madrid uc3m
 overseas
 indiavit university
 malaysiataylors university
 thailandthammasat university
 dean of the department of engineering per nylén on master in operations management
 dean of the department of engineering per nylén on operations management
 can you tell us a little about the school of engineering at university west?
 we offer a range of bachelor and master programmes. furthermore we offer phd studies in production technology engineering and work integrated learning social sciences. production technology is broad and has two tracks
 processes and automation or robotics how to control factors in a smart way
 management of production systems
 what exciting developments are you working on around operations management?
 a lot of things are changing in society and production consumer patterns logistics how we buy things the demand for customisation and the speed of development in computer science and digitalisation.
 management and leadership is now suddenly changing after remaining the same for almost 100 years. as a leader you now have to understand automation digitalisation ai computer science and sustainability including recycling remanufacturing and reskilling the current workforce. how can we meet the new requirements of consumers products and processes while reducing cost?
 in one area we are helping the auto industry in their work to convert combustion engine powertrains to more sustainable alternatives such as electric. we are developing new types of manufacturing involving automation and ai for the aerospace and vehicle industries.
 one example is 3d printing which you can use to produce a unique product or component with a batch size of one. this is impossible in traditional manufacturing. it also means you can have production onsite. this globalises manufacturing and is very resource effective as there is no waste material no shipping costs etc.
 our new master in operations management prepares students for this exciting world of production and is also made for professionals in the industry who want to reskill.
 does the new master in operations management take climate change and the circular economy into account?
 definitely everything in the programme is examined through a sustainability perspective as well. students learn about natural resources to consider where and how things are produced how much of it there is and what will happen if they use it.
 it is very important to be a leader in sustainability by reducing a companys footprint. this requires you to be very advanced in your understanding of new technologies to pursue highperformance and environmentally friendly processes and to utilise recycling and remanufacturing.
 the field of production is very creative and exciting. as a leader in this field you can make real change. your work will be very innovative because its interdisciplinary you work with people robots computers  you even have to understand physics sometimes even at an atomic level. it is complex and fascinating.
 yes we have important partners in the automotive and aerospace industries. furthermore our region in sweden is a hub for the automotive industry  an industry in rebirth designing autonomous vehicles alternative energies etc. it is a hot spot of creativity. we are also close to gkn aerospace and will definitely collaborate with them for our new master in operations management programme.
 sweden is known for efficient production and ethical management processes. we have the highest innovation rate in manufacturing in the world and the ratio of gdp from manufacturing makes sweden top in the world.
 is there anything else you want students to know?
 we have a close relationship with our students. we work more like colleagues. sweden is not a hierarchical society. its not important what your status is.  its important what you think thats what innovation is about.
 learn more about the master in operations management.
 karlstads universitetcape peninsula university of technology cape townmandela university. east cape province
 sasuf south africa sweden university forum
 this course introduces the basics of artificial neural network ann and deep neural network dnn. the course also deals with proper applicability of different anndnn algorithms in some of the practical appication like computer vision. the student shall also learn about some of the modern dnn architectures. practical exercises are provided to give handson experience.
 bsd600big data processing and analysis and
 pfa600programming for automation and
 stb600sensor technology and image analysis or the equivalent.
 here you will find defibrillators heart starter machines on campus and at ptc.
 a defibrillator is located in the universitys entrance adjacent to the service center.
 there is also a defibrillator on the wall to the left of the turnstile when you enter ptc.
 this is where the defibrillator on campus is located
 on this webpage you find information about how to apply for a degree certificate.
 students who have completed a programme at university west and have fulfilled the requirements can apply for a degree certificate. in sweden the degree certificate for your programme is not issued automatically when you have completed the studies you have to apply for it yourself.
 from 1 march 2024 university west will issue digital degree certificates at first and second cycle degree. a digital degree certificate contains the same information as a degree certificate on paper. once the degree certificate has been issued you will be notified by email. therefore remember to doublecheck which email address you have registered in ladok.
 what does digital degree certificate mean?
 your digital degree certificate is always available you can download it in ladok for students or ladok for alumni if you are no longer an active student and do not have a student account at any time. this avoids paper copies certification and scanning. the degree certificate is a pdf file that is estamped. the estamp means that the document cannot be changed after it has been retrieved from ladok. if you or someone else want to verify your degree certificate you can upload the document on ladoks page for verification. it is also possible to verify the estamp via adobe.
 to open the degree certificate correctly you must first download it on your computer and then open it with a pdf reader. if you try with a pdf editor there is a risk that you wont be able to open it because the document isnt allowed to be edited. your degree certificate is not password protected. if your computer still asks for a password you are using the wrong type of program. if so try a pdf reader instead. pdf readers can be downloaded for free from the internet.
 doctoral students will continue to receive their degree certificates in paper form. when a degree is issued the degree certificate is sent by mail to the postal address in ladok.
 how to apply for the degree certificatelog in via hv.sestudent my pagemy studies and follow the instructions. you will find a short instructional film here.
 if you are an alumni you can log in to ladok with a swedish bankid or freja eid. it is also possible to apply via a form at the bottom of this page.
 the processing of your application begins when all information is completed. the degree certificate will be issued approximately within two months depending on work load.
 attached to the degree certificate you will also receive a document in english called a diploma supplement. the diploma supplement ds following an established european template provides a standardized description of the level context content and status of the studies pursued and successfully completed by the graduate.
 the purpose of the diploma supplement is to make it easier for foreign employers and universities to understand how the swedish courses programmes and qualifications correspond to equivalents in their own countries. this will in turn make working and studying abroad less complicated for swedish students. the diploma supplement is a supplement to not a substitute for the degree certificate. the degree certificate and the diploma supplement can only be awarded once.
 application for degree certificate for degree of licentiate or doctor of philosophy.pdf
 borland j.  ramcharan p. 2000. empowerment in informal settings. in p ramcharan g roberts g grant  j borland eds. empowerment in everyday life learning disability. london j. kingsley. 2nd edition.
 chadwick d. wesson c.  fullwood c. 2013. internet access by people with intellectual disabilities inequalities and opportunities. future internet 5 376397.
 löfgrenmårtenson l sorbring e.  molin m. 2015. t@ngled up in blue views of parents and professionals on internet use for sexual purposes among young people with intellectual disabilities. sexuality  disability vol. 33 iss. 4 pp 533544.
 molin m.  gustavsson a. 2009. belonging and multidimensional selfexpectations  transition from upper secondary special programmes to working life for pupils with intellectual disabilities in sweden. la nouvelle revue de ladaptation et de la scolarisation. no 48. vol 4. 255265.
 molin m. 2010. intellectual disabilities and processes of belonging in the borderland between civil and welfare state arenas. in lb eriksson  t winman eds.. learning to fly  social pedagogy in a contemporary society. göteborg bokförlaget daidalos ab. 202223.
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. 2015. parents and teachers views on internet and social media usage by pupils with intellectual disabilities. journal of intellectual disabilities. vol 191 pp 2233.
 schalock r. 2011. the evolving understanding of the construct of intellectual disability. journal of intellectual  developmental disability 364 227237.
 seale j. k. 2014. the role of supporters in facilitating the use of technologies by adolescents and adults with learning disabilities a place for positive risktaking. european journal of special needs education 292 220236.
 sicakkan h g.  lithman y g. eds. 2006. what happens when a society is diverse? exploring multidimensional identities. lewiston n.y. edwin mellen press.
 thoreau e. 2006. ouch an examination of the selfrepresentation of disabled people on the internet. journal of computermediated communication 11 442 468.
 löfgrenmårtenson l. molin m.  sorbring s. 2018. h@ssles and hopes on the internet  what professionals have encountered in dealing with internet use and sexuality among youths with intellectual disabilities. papers of social pedagogy 81 pp 5165. doi 10.560401.3001.0011.5851
 sorbring e. löfgrenmårtenson l.  molin m. 2018. relationships and the internet. internet as an arena for love sex and companionship for young people with learning disabilities. in c. bates ed. sexuality and learning disabilities  a handbook. p 133142. pavilion publishing and media ltd.
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. 2017. new em@ncipatory landscapes? young people with intellectual disabilities internet use and identification processes. advances in social work. vol. 18 no. 2 fall 2017 645662 doi 10.1806021428
 löfgrenmårtenson l sorbring e.  molin m. 2015. t@ngled up in blue views of parents and professionals on internet use for sexual purposes among young people with intellectual disabilities. sexuality  disability. vol. 33. iss. 4. pp 533544. doi 10.1007s1119501594157
 löfgrenmårtenson l sorbring e.  molin m. 2015. t@ngled up in blue views of parents and professionals on internet use for sexual purposes among young people with intellectual disabilities. journal of sexual medicine. vol. 12. suppl 5. pp 347347. issn 17436095
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. 2015. parents and teachers views on internet and social media usage by pupils with intellectual disabilities. journal of intellectual disabilities. vol 191 pp 2233. doi 10.11771744629514563558
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. particip@tion on internet? pupils with intellectual disabilities and identification processes on internet. presentation av poster vid 23rd annual cyberpsychology cybertherapy  social networking conference cypsy23 june 2628 2018 gatineau canada.
 borgström å. a literature review about young people with intellectual disabilities and social media. 15th international cyberspace conference 2017 november 2425 2017 brno czech republic.
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. new em@ncipatory landscapes? young people with intellectual disabilities internet use and identification processes.international disability workshop june 1416 2016 folkets hus umeå sweden.
 sorbring e. molin m.  löfgrenmårtenson l. is the perception of risks andopportunities on the internet changing? the voices of intellectually challenged teens parents. 13th international cyberspace conference 2015 november 2728 2015 brno czech republic.
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. particip@tion on internet? pupils with intellectual disabilities and identification processes on internet. 13th international cyberspace conference 2015 november 2728 2015 brno czech republic.
 löfgrenmårtenson l. sorbring e.  molin m. views of parents and professionals on internet use for sexual purposes among young people with intellectual disabilities.world association for sexual health was july 2015 singapore.
 thomaz birgerson
 universitetslektor                        programchef primus phd production technology
 attefors consulting ab
 automotive components floby ab
 curtisswright surface technologies ab
 dof tools ab
 esi software
 good solution ab
 itw
 itw welding ab
 masterflow
 materion corporation
 mvv information technology ab
 new infrared technologies sl
 northwest mettech corporation
 oxeon ab
 polarium energy solutions ab
 pratt  whitney
 saint gobain coating solutions
 sqc swedish qualification centre ab
 tse  thermal spraying  engineering ab
 vbg group ab
 vida building ab
 westcoast window ab
 a week on democracy around the world  for students staff as well as the citizens.
 it is arranged by hv center for sustainability student union and kronan kulturhus within the framework of local democracy week of the council of europe.
 october 15th
 the flagship event in connection to the european local democracy week  with the theme youth participation in local democracy toward democratic resilience. this event will take place at kronan kulturhus and we will have a panel composed of hv faculty students municipality staff working with local democracy and youth issues and possibly citizens. after the panel there will be more dialoguemingling etc. here is the swedish version of the summary of the event att på internationell scen delta i det europeiska samarbetet eldw european local democracy week och i det nationsöverskridande demokratiska samtalet genom att lokalt diskutera hur högskolan studentkåren staden och kulturfritid arbetar för att uppmuntra unga att delta i det lokala demokratiska samtalet för en mer robust demokrati.
 the event will be in swedish.
 october 16ththe student union will also organize events on campus planning is still ongoingthis event will be mixed both in swedish and in english.
 october 17th online event by europa direkt more information will come
 the online europa direkt event is in english.
 october 15thhv thomas pederson andtuba inalmunicipality tobias egerzon
 hannes carl borg public affairs manager gkn aerospace engine systems sweden
 welcome to the department of engineering sciences at university west. we provide qualified engineering and technician programs and conduct graduate programs.
 the department of engineering science has around 150 employees consisting of nearly 20 professors including guest professors 10 associate professors and 20 phd students apart from 10 industrial phd students.
 the department of engineering science consists of five divisions
 division of computer science
 division of industrial engineering
 division of  industrial automation
 division of mechanical engineering
 division of electrical engineering
 we continuously update our program offer and content based on market needs and industrial requirements.
 we offer bachelor programs in the subject areas of mechanical engineering industrial engineering electrical engineering computer engineering and land surveying.
 the master programs offered are in metal additive manufacturing manufacturing engineering robotics  automation and electric vehicle engineering.
 full list of programs offered and further details
 we see internationalisation as about making the universitys activities competitive at an international level and welllinked to its national and regional commitment. in cooperation with companies and partner universities we want to create new possibilities for student and teacher mobility both incoming and outgoing. in todays globalised world international experience is becoming of great importance for intercultural workenvironment at multinational companies as well as universities.
 our strategy for internationalization is to focus on mobility collaborations with socalled preferred partners instead of trying to establish close relationships with numerous partners.
 we offer a bachelor program in mechanical engineering and all of master programs in english and some of our master programmes are also available at distance learning mode to international students. in addition we offer double degree and joint programs at bachelor and master level with preferred partners. our highly competitive phd program is also offered in english which attracts candidates from all over the world.
 we offer fullsemester course packages in english for all exchange students both in the autumn and spring semesters. we also offer student projects in collaboration with industry at swedens most modern production technology center  ptc to exchange students from our preferred partners.
 for more information on exchange studies please go to
 department of health sciences
 about health sciences
 through our educations we want to contribute to increased equal health and care in society and therefore our programs and our clinical learning center are permeated by a pedagogy and content that makes norms in care visible.
 this department offers several various nursing and specialist nursing programmes. the department also gives courses in health and culture. there are many single subject courses in varying subjects such as emergency care disability science health science history of ideas and cultural studies.
 health and culture
 specialist nursing programme
 department of social and behavioural studies
 the department provides several educational programs and singlesubject courses including teacher education with different specializations human resource science programs and social work programs with a social pedagogical profile. a masters programme is also given in child and youth studies.
 the department consists of three divisions and is headed by a head of department. the department has a departmental board which among other things works with quality issues. more than 100 employees work here.
 social work and social pedagogy
 educational science and languages
 the department of social and behavioural studies educate future teachers and social pedagogues.
 the choice of single subject courses is vast and include subjects such as pedagogics psychology sociology english social psychology social work etc.
 at each department at university west there is a contact person to help you with questions or problems related to your course studies.
 when applying for exchange studies at university west the students course selection will be examined by the coordinator in order to set up the learning agreement for the exchange period. the departmental coordinators are.
 hanna aknouchemartinssonemail hanna.aknouchemartinsson@hv.se
 wilma lundqvistwestinphone 46 701 03 99 89email wilma.lundqvistwestin@hv.se
 if you have questions related to transcript of records accommodation practicalities or similar you should contact international office.
 derek clifford louis  student from canada
 derek is studying the bachelors programme in international mechanical engineering at university west. he and his family have lived in different places in canada and in europe before moving to sweden.
 derek clifford louis grew up in canada in moose jaw saskatchewan to be exact. but before coming to live and study in sweden he and his family have lived all over the place. traveling through canada and europe. and right before moving to the trollhättanregion they lived in germany.
 now derek and his family live outside trollhättan where derek is currently studying the bachelors programme in international mechanical engineering at university west.
 derek and his family enjoying some time outdoors.
 choosing to be close to nature
 when looking for universities derek turned to sweden.
 i visited sweden over the summer derek explains. i did a bike tour and found that i really enjoyed the landscape and that that the people here were very open. so when the bachelors programme started that seemed like a great opportunity.
 to derek and his family being close to nature is very important.
 there are a lot of great bigger universities in sweden but to live close by them you may have to live in a bigger city. which means fewer opportunities for hiking and being outdoors. so for derek and his family university west and trollhättan  a smaller city with lots of surrounding nature was a great choice.
 my wife and i are very outdoorminded and being close to the water and the forest was very important to us he explains. and not only for us but also for our kids so that they would be able to go out hiking each day and get fresh air.
 though being familiar with the nature in sweden in general derek did not know much about the trollhättanarea in particular. so before starting school he took a road trip up from germany to check it out.
 when i saw the area i felt this was a winwin package says derek. the programme is relatively new the class sizes are small and there is the opportunity to have nature around.
 seeing how the theoretical connects to the practical
 derek finds the content of the programme exciting. just having studied for one semester he says that the most exciting part of the studies so far has been learning mechanics.
 its really interesting and i can clearly see the applications he explains. i can now see things going from mathematical equations on the page to actual applications. that gets me excited  seeing how the theoretical is applied directly to the real world.
 earlier derek would work directly in the real world not being able to do the calculations necessary. for example when making surf boards he would create 6 or 7 prototypes. now however derek is getting to the point where he can calculate how much strength a product needs to have instead of testing his way forward.
 even though i am just in the beginning stages of my studies i feel like i can already go back to what i was doing and make it infinitely easier. instead of making 6 or 7 prototypes i can now make only a couple.
 though the process of attaining all the knowledge presented during his studies can be difficult at times.
 i wish i could just open up my head and pour the knowledge in because thats what i really want says derek. but when you work really hard on something and that light bulb finally lights up and you figure it out  thats really cool.
 when the studies are extra tough he will make use of being close to nature and take a couple of minutes outdoors.
 usually almost every time when you get back to the studies you get that ahamoment. and it is those moments of the studies i really enjoy says derek.
 small scale and inclusive
 one of his reasons for choosing the bachelors programme in international mechanical engineering was the small class sizes. back in canada he was used to classes much bigger.
 friends of mine are studying engineering back in canada and they have class sizes of up to 300 students in one lecture hall derek explains. so to be able to meet the instructor and talk to them has great value.
 since the small class sizes allows the students to have a direct interactions with the teachers they can much better understand their personality and teaching style.
 even though the classes are small they include people from all over the world. derek explains it as a melting pot of cultures coming together.
 for example right now we are learning in a study group and in this group there are people from literally all over the globe he says. we just kind of sit down together and have a good time work on our group projects and then during breaks we will laugh about how we all do things so differently and talk about different food customs and so on. i find that fun and special.
 the future
 on the top of dereks list of future plans is of course finishing the programme. but after that he dreams of working with electrical transportation such as bikes and velomobiles something that he has had an interest in for a long time.
 i have been building stuff like that in my private time derek explains. so it would be nice to produce something that would be certifiable. something i could properly take on the streets and enjoy.
 a flexible employer that can say hey come up with a cool project and if it is feasible let us work through it would be perfect for derek. he really enjoys the process of going from napkin engineering to having a working prototype.
 thats the area i would like to niche myself in and well see what comes in the future derek says.
 university west is located right in the middle of trollhättan.
 the world of humans has undergone rapid developments of technological innovation during the recent few decades. consensus exists around the very fact that our modern ways of living and interacting with humans organizations and society is heavily influenced by the implications of digital technologies. at the same time the challenges of coping with the increasing effect of digital technologies creates incentive for humans organizations and society to develop knowledge and skills that make them resilient towards emerging relationships with future digital technologies.
 pulley m. l.  wakefield m. 2001. building resiliency how to thrive in times of change. center for creative leadership.
 registration is now closed.
 for the poster presentations there will be stands available with the size a0 841 x 1189 mm.
 for a three paper full paper session it is 903  30 mins 20 presentation  10 min qafor a four paper full paper session it is 904  20 mins 15 presentation  5 min qa for the rip sessions it is 603 20 mins 15 presentation  5 min qa
 please note that there is no possibility to print your posters onsite at the conference. therefore we kindly ask you to bring the posters you want to present.
 programsubmissionsreview guidekey dateskeynotesvenuetravel  accommodationconference committeesdoctoral consortium
 proceeding paperscontact the organizers desrist2024@hv.se
 universitetslektor                        phd and associate professor of information systems
 universitetslektor                        senior advisor strategic internationalisation
 detect  defect detection and impact on faitgue behavior for metal am parts with complex geometries
 hastelloy x is a solid solution strengthened nickelbased superalloy for high temperature applications. it is used in hot sections of gas turbines where welding is commonly used as a joining technique during part production. however laser welding of hastelloy x has been found to cause heat affected zone liquation cracking. this is also a potential concern when using laser metal deposition with powder as feedstock material lmdp where multilayer material deposition as during lmdp generally provide a greater risk of crack formation. the thermal profile and its effect on microstructure and mechanical properties is therefore a critical concern for the industrial partners in this project.
 the combination of the complex metallurgy of the material and the multiparameter environment of lmdp necessitates the development of a suitable process window tailored to both material and application. being able to understand and control the material changes and effects on mechanical performance will enable the application of the technique in production and provide a more controlled and repeatable repair process of cast and welded gas turbine components. the project is therefore of great interest to producers of structural gas turbine components for aerospace gkn aerospace and landbased applications siemens.
 societal impact hub west
 developing programmes that meet the industrys needs
 university wests work integrated learning wil profile is based upon the idea that knowledge is acquired through working with others. this resulted in the new programme master in electrical vehicle se opposite page. a result of a close collaboration with the automotive industry and an increasing need for new competence as a result of electricity replacing fossil fuels.
 its an extremely fastmoving market in terms of development says caroline kjellin propulsion solution management expert at volvo. there are new technologies coming all the time. if you want to work at the forefront of technology this is definitely an area where you want to work caroline explains. the benefit of a more specialised programme like this is that the electric car development market is extremely big.
 the university involves industry reference groups when developing new programmes to ensure relevance and quality. automotive companies including volvo and nevs engaged themselves in the master in electric vehicle engineering programme by offering feedback regarding content structure examination as well as degree objectives.
 since volvo nevs and other automotive companies are potential future employers for the students at university west it is important that these types of companies know that the right knowledge and skills are acquired through the education.
 we are also trying to keep the students who have been working with us after they graduate. we need new minds in addition to our senior staff.
 integrated part
 developing textile waste sorting technologies business models and pilot plant
 the project shall create prerequisites for the establishment of a national pilot facility and open arena for the development of sorting technologies and business models for better usage of textile waste.
 the pilot facility shall develop verify and establish methods technologies and business models for better usage of collected textile waste and by doing so opening up for new environmentally and business wise better usage of textile waste. todays dominating usage of textile waste in limited amounts is by charity organizations in second hand stores. the rest is either incinerated or stored. very small amounts of textile waste are recycled back to material today. the project will establish an open and fair business model opening up for all actors in sweden that produces or manages textile waste to use the future sorting facility and open arena. the project shall also evaluate the possibility to involve other nordic actors.
 outage on canvas. investigation in progress.
 digiam  faster adoption of additive manufactoring by digitalization of qaulity assurance and material stock
 additive manufacturing am is considered to be an example of digitalization in manufacturing as it enables production of a physical component from a digital model.
 in terms of product customization and light weight design the am industry has shown its superiority over conventional manufacturing methods. however with respect to component quality production cost and productivity am processes have yet to improve in order to compete with conventional manufacturing methods. this has led to a slow adoption of am by swedish firms. the project faces the aforementioned challenges and tackles them with the aid of further digitalization of the am process and production system.
 focus is placed on
 1 digitalization of the quality assurance and
 2 digitalization of component stock. regarding quality assurance the monitoring solutions included in am equipments do not have the precision required for detection of fine defects and currently the am industry depends heavily on separate nondestructive or mechanical testing.
 the project aims to introduce new inprocess monitoring methods using highend systems and sensors for layerbylayer data acquisition and evaluation. furthermore for products that necessitate post am operations application of robotized 3d scanners will be investigated. the measurements collected during inprocess and postprocess monitoring will be compiled in a digital format which is to serve as a digital certification of the am component.
 the second part of the project focuses on digitalization of components for am and evaluates the economical and environmental benefits of this concept. for this purpose capabilities of the latest 3d scanners and reverse engineering software for creating cad models will be analyzed.
 swerea ivf
 digilab is an arena where students can explore and test simple and advanced digital tools and equipment in an attractive studyworkplace.
 the aim is for the user to become more receptive to using digital technology. we hope that the lab will become a place where students can learn from each other and become a place that sparks curiosity and creativity.
 digilab is located on the library entrance level opposite to the stairs. the light turns on automatically and inside youll find audio and camera equipment smart screen etc. to use for interviews and podcasts.
 book digilab to use digital equipment. you can not book digilab as a group study room.
 borrow dictaphones cameras headphones etc.
 are you curious about the type of equipment and software we have what to try and how it works? read more about our equipment.
 digipod  exploring study tips and digital tools
 through the swedish podcast digipodden we get the opportunity to ask our lecturers about digital tools and methods.
 read more and listen to all our episodes on bibliotek.hv.sedigipodden in swedish.
 collaboration with open lab
 read more about openlab.
 borrow mini camera
 mini cameras are now available for loan in the library information desk. read more about how to use the camera and about digilabs other equipment
 are you curious about the type of equipment and software we have available in the lab and how it works?
 illustrationsdatabasen undraw. creative commons illustrationer att använda i presentationen.
 digistress  digital stress in hybrid organizations  leading and organizing for a sustainable workplace
 in this project the relation between digital stress wellbeing and sustainability more specifically leadership in the hybrid workplace is in focus.
 the covid19 pandemic induced a rapid digital change in numerous workplaces. due to the lockdowns and need for social distancing many knowledge workers started working from home using digital technologies to communicate and conduct their work. leadership will inevitably play a decisive role in the process of introducing and realizing the hybrid workplace and how work practices are organized in the future.
 as good as possible for as many as possible by adapting the pedagogical material to accessibility and working with including design we create the best possible digital environment for all our students and we also meet the legal requirement for accessibility.
 delimitations at university west
 timedependent media e.g. video and audio with or without the possibility of interaction published before september 23 2020 are exempted from the application of the law according to the dos regulation.
 making available course activities in recorded form e.g. introductions live lectures seminars etc. which are only available to course participants for rehearsal purposes during the current course at hv is not covered by our requirement for text and visual interpretation. the delimitation only applies if the area of use is limited to a designated and limited group of participants and when the material must be distributed to the participants quickly for it to fulfil its purpose
 the same applies to all live broadcasts i.e. streamed lectures zoom connections etc. that are not recorded and distributed afterwards. live broadcast refers to all events you have to participate in at a given time synchronously to participate.
 digital services from third parties that have neither been funded nor developed by the university for example links in canvas to external websites with material completely without the involvement or funding of högskolan väst are not covered by the requirement for accessibility adaptation.
 materials produced by students such as degree theses powerpoint presentations video productions essays etc. are exempt from the requirement for accessibility adaptation but the use of accessibilityadapted templates should be encouraged such as word and powerpoint templates.
 analogously produced material such as e.g. use of a whiteboard drawingssketches etc. do not need to be adapted.
 if there is a course participant in the current course group with a naiscertificate the accessibility of the material needs to be adapted to a greater extent and is done in agreement with funka paid for by the institution.
 in all other cases where media material created during a course is used at a later time or in other contexts it is covered by the requirement for accessibility adaptation.
 how to adjust
 how to publish
 how to format
 digital communication  the key to enhanced integration
 the aim is to create a powerful national digital tool that provides the user with tools for among other things practice vocational language develop oral proficiency and communicate with others.
 our innovation project aims to take a holistic approach to language integration in sweden. there is a great need to find successful ways of increasing the integration of foreignborn women and men in sweden where a lack of adequate language skills is a major obstacle especially to be able to enter into the labor market. there is a clear link between among other things weak language skills and increased gaps in society leading to segregation.
 our project is driven by a combination of strong actors within swedish for immigrants sfi universities businesses and nonprofit organizations that can develop sustainable solutions on how to support and help foreignborn persons to be integrated by means of mobile technology.
 foreignborn women and men are involved in the project from the start and in the development from identifying needs to developing solutions from their experiences and views. in our initial studies we have laid the foundation for understanding the prerequisites needs and aspirations of the target group. we have also established contact with various businesses authorities and educational organizations during stage 1. the project is highly userdriven where collaboration is the keyword to finding solutions to the integration challenges.
 the aim
 the aim of the project is to support foreignborn persons in being able to navigate in society and develop their language skills. adequate language skills are essential to handle social codes conventions habits and cultures. our various skills and perspectives within the project contribute to the solution a powerful national digital tool that provides the user with tools for among other things practice vocational language develop oral proficiency and communicate with others.
 social society sweden ab
 this is a course focusing on the digitalisation of the automation including industry 4.0. different areas with in industrial digitalisation such as internet of things iot digital twins virtual factory internet security and factory scanning are discussed. the course consists of seminars laboratoray exercises and study visit to companies.
 degree of bachelor of science in computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering or industrial engineering and management. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 he credits in programming and 15 he credits in mathematics. verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english benglish 6 in the swedish upper secondary school high school or equivalent.
 sma700simulation of automated production and
 sst600sensor technology or the equivalent.
 professor                        informatik
 the aim of this project is to shift the focus from designing technology for elderly to designing technology for ageing.
 to this date the design of technology for seniors has mainly been focusing on introducing ict to people over 65 and on designing systems specifically for the older population. nowadays however the idea that people over 65 find digital technology as something exotic is a myth. most swedes in this agegroup have been using technology throughout their working lives has owned at least one smartphone and navigate through digital forms payments and healthcare services. it is not about us designing for them anymore it is us designing for our future selves.
 in digital seniors we aim to contribute to a sustainable inclusive and free of elder related stereotypes future digital society. we plan to achieve this by studying how to design digital technology that adapts to the peoples ageing process.
 more information on this website eng
 ulf andersson
 virtual reality training in psychiatric care and social care  18th sept
 presenters dr. sofie wass  prof. leona chandra kruseaffiliation department of information systems university of agder norwaytitle virtual reality training in psychiatric care and social carezoom room
 turning the world artificial intelligence virtual reality and subjectivity  25th sept
 presenters prof. jonna bornemarkaffiliation the center for studies in practical knowledge södertörns högskola swedentitle turning the world artificial intelligence virtual reality and subjectivityzoom room
 emerging digital technologies for future practices  2nd oct
 presenters prof. juho lindmanaffiliation department of applied it gothenburg university swedentitle emerging digital technologies for future practiceszoom room
 artificial intelligence in the surveillance society  9th oct
 presenters prof. jan ljungbergaffiliation department of applied it gothenburg university swedentitle artificial intelligence in the surveillance societyzoom room
 an outlook on sustainability meaning and it  16th october
 presenters dr. thorsten schoormanaffiliation department of information systems braunschweig university germanytitle an outlook on sustainability meaning and itzoom room
 designing with and for meaning  30th oct
 presenters dr. malin wikaffiliation department of information systems karlstad university swedentitle designing with and for meaningzoom room
 driving charging automating caring  how automated and coordinated control of electric car charging and heating affects everyday practices  20th nov
 presenters hanna björner baueraffiliation rise institute swedentitle driving charging automating caring  how automated and coordinated control of electric car charging and heating affects everyday practiceszoom room
 design principles for a blockchainedbased multisided platform for the sustainable trade of water an affordance approach  27th nov
 presenters hanna buyssensaffiliation department of digital transformation vlerick business school and ku leuven belgiumtitle design principles for a blockchainedbased multisided platform for the sustainable trade of water an affordance approachzoom room
 there are a number of digital tools to facilitate your teaching. we have gathered information about the universitys tools available to you.
 with powerpoint
 learning management system login required
 digital writing surface
 marcus och amalia wallenbergs
 med powerpoint
 digitalisation and knowledge development in industrial environments
 we study digitalisation processes and knowledge development in industrial environments.
 technological developments and industrys digital transformation are affecting businesses traditional working routines and management practices. with design and implementation studies in industrial production we can increase our knowledge of the technological transition. this involves both production technology challenges and how the technological transition affects people organisations and production work for industrial personnel such as operators technicians and managers.
 the overall aim of this suggested project is to strengthen the international position of the area electric driveline as a focus area in building up a complete academic environment.
 the vision within the area of electric driveline at university west supports the overall vision university west is a driving force within society working together with the surrounding community to create knowledge and to make this knowledge accessible to a wider audience. the strategy further communicates that all educational programmes shall be available for campus students and be offered fully online or distance learning centers. the overall aim of this suggested project is to strengthen the international position of the area electric driveline as a focus area in building up a complete academic environment. hence we here apply for funding to develop three international online courses to the new master program master in electric vehicle engineering to be held in spring 2022. the courses will be developed in modules that also are planned to be given as independent courses open for professionals.
 digitalization for health promotion
 the overall aim of the project is to develop innovative working methods to achieve sustainable health in working life for employees in the production industry with the support of digital solutions.
 todays working life in the production industry is facing major changes and challenges. these changes often place great demands on the knowledge and competence of the individual employee at the same time as the employee needs to be flexible in the performance of his or her work. mental illness is increasing in society and some of it seems to be workrelated. psychosocial problems challenge the society as those costs in sweden are about 150  200 billion sek per year of which almost 50 billion counts for large companies constituting about 2025 percent of the total salary costs for all companies in sweden. the covid19 pandemic has also increased pressure on people working at home with physical isolation from colleagues. therefore companies metrics and efforts to achieve longterm and sustainable health for employees become important. although companies invest relatively large amounts of resources in their employees health and work environment there is often a lack of a followup of metrics as well as effects these have on the companies finances and sustainability.
 how can digital solutions be designed to achieve learning and support for sustainable working life and workrelated health of employee in the industrial workplace?
 what effects can be achieved with the introduction of digital solutions for sustainable working life and workrelated health in the industrial workplace?
 digitalization project with focus on sustainable tourism
 when the covid19 pandemic swept across the world many things came to a halt. among those affected were the tourism and hospitality industries which had to cancel and adapt their operations. university west has been a part of the uprest project investigating how the european tourism sector can develop through digitalization.
 uprest is an erasmus collaboration stemming from a larger context a cooperative project initiated by the eu commission where 100 european municipalities have worked together on digitalization.
 in the wake of the pandemic the municipalities of vänersborg and trollhättan saw significant declines in tourism. they decided to jointly explore the areas of digitalization and sustainable tourism to ensure that the tourism industry remains competitive and relevant to the needs of future visitors.
 it has become clear that digital experiences and sustainability are crucial factors when deciding which cities and countries to visit and there is significant potential for development within local ecosystems. the projects goal is to develop the digital skills of various stakeholders. university west became an early partner in this initiative.
 we have a long tradition at the university of studying and educating within digitalization. we work extensively with ai vr and ar and how to create awareness of the impact of technology on tasks says kristina johansson associate professor of workintegrated learning at university west.
 in the uprest project we have been involved in developing an educational manual that managers can use to educate themselves and their staff on digitalization related to sustainable tourism johansson adds.
 european partnership
 vänersborg and trollhättan are part of the swedishitalian eu network sern which includes partner cities cervia and ravenna and the croatian region of kvarner. together they formed a partnership that secured funding for the uprest project an acronym for up  reskilling sustainable tourism.
 we started with a situational analysis to understand what was known about ai big data and other digitalization concepts. it turned out that there was generally a vague understanding and limited competence in these areas. therefore university west was tasked with developing educational material for the tourism hotel restaurant industries and tourist offices explains anders fridén project manager for uprest.
 three tips for the local tourism industry
 the educational content is tailored for european tourism entrepreneurs to provide a better understanding of how to use new digital tools to develop their businesses. as the project nears completion anders fridén shares three tips for local tourism operators on how to use the training
 i recommend gathering your team when the tourist season is over completing the training with all the modules films and quizzes available and then reflecting on what it could mean for your own business in 2025 says fridén.
 next i would advise finding a partner to conduct a peer review with our tool which provides qualified feedback on areas for improvement. my final tip is to establish a close collaboration with the municipality and the tourist organization to develop cooperation further fridén continues.
 university west has been responsible for the final educational manual ensuring it is a sustainable pedagogical and selfinstructing product.
 this training equips participants better offering significant development potential for those who complete it. we target those who will conduct the training and my advice is to go through the material twice from start to finish. once thats done you can determine which parts are most relevant to use. the training is organized into modules allowing users to select the sections that best fit their business says kristina johansson.
 this fall the uprest project will be reported back to the eu.
 contact anders fridén vänersborg municipality and kristina johansson university west.
 digitallyenabled production
 this course digitallyenabled production is offered in a collaboration between mälardalens högskola mdh högskolan väst hv and linnéuniversitetet lnu. the course will be given between september  december 2021.
 the course aims to support and facilitate our partner manufacturing companies to become competitive in digitallyenabled production. during the course we address the potential prerequisites and capabilities required for implementing industry 4.0 in the context of an overall production system. more specifically we increase the competence base of companies in three areasinternal logistics systems virtual factory and sensor and signal processingwhich can holistically interconnect the key components for the successful implementation of industry 4.0.
 this course consists of three interconnected course modules at an advanced level and it is offered between september and december 2021
 benefits to companies
 course covers the holistic perspective of industry 4.0 implementation including overall plant level production cell level component and system level and describes how to interconnect them in an efficient way.
 course gives a possibility for industrial practitioners to work on real industrial cases from their own companies with the expert supervision from three universities.
 course supports theory and practical elaboration through laboratory works experiments and onsite seminars.
 course gives access to experts in each area which are complimentary to address the complex challenges in industry 4.0 implementation.
 course facilitates access to larger industrial network and possibility to exchange ideas and experiences within the network.
 a possibility to continue with the optional course 25 credits after the end of 75 credits if one like to conduct a business case on industry 4.0 within their company.
 this course is a collaboration between university west linnaeus university and mälardalen university. the course consists of three interconnected course modules  introduction to machine learning industry digitalisation  aspects of industry 4.0 and applied machine learning  whereof one introductory module is on basic level and the last two modules are on advanced level.
 internal logistics in industry 4.0 2.5 credits
 virtual factory and robot cell simulation 2.5 credits
 duplex stainless steels are a success story offering a unique combination of excellent properties at a modest alloying level and at competitive prices.
 however they have not quite reached the market position that could be expected. the project therefore aims at increasing the use of duplex stainless steels by
 providing endusers with an easytouse computerized online guideline for flexible and productive welding of todays commercially available duplex stainless steel grades. the guideline will predict the resulting microstructure and properties for a given choice of welding method welding parameters steel welding consumables and weld geometry. the result will be related to requirements in codes and standards and advice will be given on the suitability of the suggested welding procedure.
 making it possible to develop new and optimized steels and filler metals faster by providing a verified and documented methodology for predicting the response of any duplex stainless steel composition to welding thermal cycles. this will make it possible to in a flexible and economical way develop specialized grades for new applications.
 the project builds on a prestudy where the methodology of combining thermodynamic models and computational weld modelling for prediction of the response to composition and weld thermal cycles was tested. the approach was successful and results were verified by comparison with experiments. the consortium consists of national experts from the entire value chain covering production welding and use of duplex stainless steel as well as expertise on modelling. this ensures that the interests of both producers and endusers are considered and that the competence needed for the project is available.
 sandvik materials technology
 thermocalc software
 dipyai dikw pyramidbased agile ai architecture for sensor data processing
 dipyai  dikw pyramidbased agile ai architecture for sensor data processing
 the project proposes dipyai an agile ai architecture based on the dataknowledgeinformationwishdom dikw pyramid for processing sensor data in production environments. it aims to address challenges related to data assimilation quality detection and modular information extraction.
 the proposed architecture consists of three layers viz a sensordependent data preprocessing layer a sensoragnostic ml layer for converting data into information and an applicationspecific layer for knowledge extraction. there are two major merits of the work. by having a layered the architecture can easily be repurposed for different industries. secondly this agility in the architecture also facilitates the changing of sensors as well as overall goals of the architecture.the project aligns with primus digitization goal and offers a flexible solution applicable to multiple industries promoting sustainability datasharing and architecture sharing. by developing dipyai the project aims to provide a scalable and adaptable solution for sensor data processing for industries.
 ap and t
 office 365 epost
 atlas copco rock drills ab
 carpenter powder products ab
 creative tools sweden ab
 tooltec trestad ab
 digitalization of supply chain in swedish additive manufacturing disam
 disam will strengthen the competitiveness of the swedish manufacturing industry through improved production flexibility and quicker timetomarket.
 with focus on customer needs this will be accomplished by aligning the digital and physical supply chains in additive manufacturing am for industrial production and product development of metal and polymer based components for direct or remanufacturing purposes.
 disam will demonstrate how am and digitalization can increase flexibility while reducing the threshold and associated risks of introducing am for the participating end users and support higher degree of digitalization in the amsupply chain and the manufacturing industry. as disam covers several of the major am techniques the project will provide a solid platform that can easily include other systemstechnique in disam to digitalize the supply chain of am and push toward real printondemand. the entire industrial product development cycle will be demonstrated through a series of case studies selected by the participating companies all having a strong pull for digitalized and integrated am to reduce lead time introduce simple customization innovative products and traceability.
 the long term impact of the project will be increased adoption of digitalization in am by the swedish manufacturing industry with increased flexibility and competitiveness as a result.
 disassembly methods of joints for circular battery packs dijon
 the electrification of the transportation sector has led to a dramatic increase in electric vehicle ev battery production and is also expected to continue to grow exponentially in the coming decades. to enable circularity the battery packs must be designed with a new approach. more specifically the joints in the battery packs must be manufactured to allow to be taken apart disassembled and then joined again reassembled if needed.
 so far ev battery design and manufacturing has focused on efficient and highperforming virgin products. however to enable circularity in the ev battery industry extra attention must be paid to reuse remanufacturing and recycling aspects of the battery packs. to enable circularity the battery packs must be designed with a new approach. more specifically the joints in the battery packs must be manufactured to allow to be taken apart disassembled and then joined again reassembled if needed.
 the goal of this project is to develop new joint design solutions including disassembly and reassembly methods which enable a circular flow of next generations ev battery packs. todays battery packs are joined with a combination of adhesive joints mechanical joints and thermal joints all with their pros and eons in terms of different properties such as performance manufacturability cost etc.
 the project is lead by rise with project partners swerim and university west who inhibit proven knowledge expertise and experience within the field of joining technologies and disassembly. in addition volvo car corporation and polestar represent relevant ev battery design competencies while stena recycling can provide the project with relevant challenges and requirements from the recycling industry. abb is a key party for automatization and industrialization of the disassembly methods and atlas copco will provide support regarding joining equipment and disassembly automatization.
 stena recycling
 according to the higher education ordinance matters concerning disciplinary measures against students must be handled by a disciplinary board. such a board shall be present at each university.
 the composition of the disciplinary board the members terms of office the handling of cases etc. are stated in the higher education ordinance chapter 10. the vicechancellor is the chairman of the board.
 niclas johannisson legally qualified member
 christina olsenlundh deputy registered member
 angelica dahlman teacher representative
 åsa thomsen deputy teacher representative
 discontinued course or course that changes course code
 here you will find information on courses that are being discontinued or changes course code
 reexamination
 if a course is being discontinued or gets a new course code another three reexaminations are offerd beyond the two original examinations that are given in connection with the course. the last reexamination has to be at least a year after the last original examination in connection to the course.
 it is your responsibility as a student to find out when these last three examinations are.
 registration to the final three reexaminations
 if the exam you want to partake in is an oncampus written examination you register for the exam in ladok for students. this should be done when the registration is opened between 25 days to 8 days prior to the exam.
 you can find more information regarding oncampus written exam here.
 other examinations
 when it comes to other forms of examinations it is the course coordinator who decides wheter or not the students should register to the exam beforehand. you as a student must therefore find out what applies for the examination you want to partake in. you will find what applies to the exam by looking at the course schedule see below.
 date for the final three reexaminations
 cam100cad and machine elements 7.5 he credits
 ear200management accounting and financial accounting 5 he credits
 erv100financial accounting 75 he credits
 etk100aestetics 7.5 he credits
 exm504degree project 15 he credits
 fbt400real estate formation 2 75 he credits
 feg100real estate economics 7.5 he credits
 fga201remote sensing and gis analysis 75 he credits
 gft200basic real estate formation 75 he credits
 gis100geographical information system 75 he credits
 gpa131fundamental programming with an objectoriented language 10 he credits
 grv200gis rastervector 75 he credits
 hsg400sustainable urban and rural planning and environmental law basic level 75 he credits
 iia102introduction to informatics 7.5 he credits
 iia105introduction to informatics 5.0 he credits
 ivp100introduction to business processes 5 he credits
 kmb204clinical medicine and nursing in somatic illness 225 he credits
 lml201terrestrial and airborne laser scanning 75 he credits
 mia111microbiology immunology and care hygiene 75 he credits
 org102organisation theory and theory of science webbased 75 he credits
 ova100organisation theory and theory of science 75 he credits
 pia100the implementation and organization of politics 75 he credits
 pih200planning theory with focus on urban planning and urban design 45 he credits
 sav110society and welfare policy 6 he credits
 ssa200swedish as a second language teaching literature from a second language perspective 15 he credits
 sva108swedish as a second language teaching from a second language perspective 75 he credits
 sva109swedish as a second language language structure and use i 15 he credits
 sva121swedish as a second language 130 migration and translanguaging 15 he credits
 vek100operational and financial control 7.5 he credits
 norwayassociate professor phd elin aasen ntnu campus aalesund associate professor phd berit misund dahl ntnu campus aalesund lisbeth alnes phd student. ntnu campus aalesund
 denmarkassociate professor phd jeanne strunck aalborg university aalborg phd aase marie ottesen phd aalborg university aalborg
 we have a malfunction in our landline telephony it is not possible to make or receive calls on the telephones. the fault lies with our supplier and we currently have no estimated action time.
 disruption on our online computer labs hvdesktop
 we would like to inform you that we are currently experiencing issues with our online computer labs. our technical team is working diligently to resolve this. thank you for your patience and understanding as we work to address the situation.
 fixed  disruptions in microsoft services
 microsoft has announced that everything should be working again.right now microsoft is experiencing disruptions in its services.difficult to access emailfiles.services that appear to be affectedmicrosoft teamsexchange onlineoutlooksharepoint onlineonedrive for business
 university west offers both programmes and courses as distance learning.  distance learning offers flexibility but requires the same amount of study time as studying on campus.
 distance learning requires you as a student to take on the responsibility of complying with the instructions rules and deadlines set for your programme or course. you have to plan and manage your time to keep the study pace required to meet deadlines to coordinate with your fellow students in the various course modules and to keep meetings and examinations at set times.
 you apply to our distance programmes or courses the same way you apply for programmes or courses on campus through
 we offer four distance learning programmes and a small selection of courses.
 if you are admitted to a distance course
 once you have accepted the admission offer you must register for studies otherwise you will lose your place. find more information on our before start of studies page.
 we use the learning management system canvas as a tool for communication between lecturers and students. most communication and information is provided through this system or your student mail. in canvas you will find syllabi compulsory modules exams and study schedules as well as other useful information on your programme or course. when university west cooperates with other universities and when a programme or course is given together with other universities a different tool may be used.
 examinations can be given either by home examination written assignment seminars in an eclassroom or in some cases on campus or at a local study centre. written assignments are handed in via canvas not by email. rules and schedules for examination are provided by your assigned lecturer.
 as a distance learner you can have your books sent to your home address. find more information on our library  distance studies page
 how it works  studying distance education
 compulsory modules
 please note that there are modules tied to a certain date for instance supervision compulsory online meetings or various examinations. there cab be courses which require you to attend one or more sessions on campus in trollhättan while other courses are completely webbased.
 recorded lectures
 as a distance student part of your programme is delivered in recorded lectures via canvas. if a programme or course is given in collaboration with another university a different tool may be used. the recordings are usually generated in a studio on campus or from classroom lectures. open education resources oer may also be used.
 zoom is a webbased conferencing system with full audio video and screen sharing capabilities. when you connect to a zoommeeting you should use a headset to avoid audio feedback. if possible set up and test your audio devices 1520 minutes before the start of the meeting. this also gives you time to follow the lecturers instructions etc. how to connect to a zoommeeting
 university west also offers meetings using skype for business. you can download the software to your computer or use the skype for business web app to join a meeting.
 get started with your studies
 how to reach university west
 studying at a distance
 university west offers both programmes and courses at a distance. studying remotely is flexible but requires as much study time as studying on campus.
 a flexible way to study
 do you want to start studying  but not move? do you want to further your education and at the same time continue to work? studying remotely can be done in several different ways but the common denominator is that a large part of the studies take place digitally. with the help of a learning platform you communicate with the teacher and other students where there are discussion forums opportunities for group work digital meetings and recorded lectures.
 a distance education can be entirely at a distance or with a few meetings on site. the advantage is a flexible way of studying for those who want to have a lot of freedom to decide when and where they want to study. it is important to keep in mind that compulsory elements of your education may be scheduled during the day or evening even if they take place remotely.
 courses offered at learning centres have compulsory meetings at the place of study. the advantage of studying through learning centres is that you have the opportunity to meet other students in the area and get support from the learning centres staff.
 if you have any questions about our distance education please contact our service center.
 studying at a distance means that you as a student must take a great deal of responsibility for your studies and that you follow the instructions rules and deadlines that exist for your particular education.
 you must be able to plan to keep the required pace of study with a certain number of study hours per week be able to coordinate with other fellow students in the various parts of the courses and be able to participate in the set times available for meetings group meetings and examinations.
 how to apply for our distance education
 you apply for our distance education in the same way as for other courses  via antagning.se.
 we offer several different online programs and courses that are given at a distance. read up on hv.seutbildning how the studies in each distance education are structured.
 if you are admitted to a distance education
 if you are starting a programme course package or freestanding course you always register via the link in our registration email. read more under new student.
 if you are admitted to one of our course packages that are given remotely you will also need to register for each new course in the course package. a registration is required for you to receive student aid from csn submit examination assignments and participate in seminars as well as access the course page in our learning platform canvas.  read more on our registration page.
 in most cases information and communication with teachers about your education takes place via our learning platform canvas and your student email. on the learning platform there is information about the structure of the education compulsory elements examination assignments and any schedule. in some cases when a course is given together with another higher education institution the information may be provided via another systemlearning platform.
 a course can be examined through for example takehome exams written assignments seminars in eclassrooms or in some cases seminars andor exams on site campus. the examinations for the programme are submitted on the learning platform not by email. information about times and rules for examinations can be obtained from your teachers.
 as a distance student you have the opportunity to have books sent to your home. read more on the librarys page about distance learning.
 further information
 how distance learning works
 when you study remotely there are things that you need to keep in mind. here we have gathered some good tips and advice.
 library and distance learning
 as a distance student you have the opportunity to have books sent to your home.
 link validation can help you check your links.
 the link validation tool goes through all linked materials in your canvas course and checks if the link is working for the student. it could be a link to a page in another course or a video that is not properly published in the course that the link validation detects. unfortunately link validation doesnt find all incorrect links but it is a good help along the way.
 heres how
 click on settings. you will now find validate links in content in the column to the right.
 start link validation. it may take a little while but you dont need to wait on the page during that time.
 contact the ict educational developers at akademus if you have any questions.
 2. doctoral consortium notifications march 15 2024
 the mentors at the doctoral consortium for desrist 2024 are
 prof. sofia schöbel
 prof. sofie wass
 prof. stefan cronholm
 submission and review process
 your submission must not exceed 4 pages a4 or us letter 8.5 x 11 inches with 2.5cm or 1 inch margin in 12point times new roman font.  submissions should be in pdf format and submitted via easychair. please select the doctoral consortium track.
 your submissions should clearly state
 submissions will be reviewed by the doctoral consortium chairs and faculty mentors and a set of submissions will be accepted for presentation at the consortium. for more information on the doctoral consortium please contact the consortium cochairs leona chandra leona.chandra@uia.no and john venable j.venable@curtin.edu.au.
 suman next  sustainable manufacturing through nextgeneration additive processes
 thermal posttreatment of alloy 718 produced by electron beam melting sneha goel doktor i produktionsteknik.
 towards understanding the fatigue behavior of alloy 718 manufactured by powder bed fusion processes arun ramanathan balachandramurthi doktor i produktionsteknik.
 microstructure modelling of additive manufacturing of alloy 718 chamara kumara doktor i produktionsteknik.
 electron beampowder bed fusion of alloy 718 effect of process parameters on microstructure evolution paria karimi doktor i produktionsteknik.
 formatmallar
 microsoft powerpoint
 how to get to and from trollhättan when in sweden
 to get to trollhättan from one of the two international airports in stockholm and gothenburg can be done in several ways. to try to clarify the different alternatives two seperate pages are available in the menu on the left hand side starting from each of the two airports. at a more detailed level the different available routes to trollhättan are explained.
 from gothenburg to university west
 arrival by air
 there are two airports in gothenburg. landvetter airport has daily flights to and from most major european cities. there is a convenient airport bus service that connects landvetter to the central station in gothenburg. buses run 24 times an hour and the trip costs approximately sek 70.gothenburg city airport named säve in swedish also has an airport busservice which runs in connection to the arrival of each flight. the bus takes you to the central station in gothenburg.
 arrival by train or bus
 trains and buses run regularly to trollhättan from gothenburg. the trip to the town is approximately 50 minutes by train. buses complete the trip in approximately 90 minutes. the central bus station in gothenburg nils ericson terminal is located next to the train station central station. gothenburg also has intercity rail links with stockholm copenhagen and oslo.
 from stockholm to university west
 by air
 you can fly to our airport malöga and take a short taxitrip
 by train
 by bus
 by train from trollhättan city train station
 take train from trollhättan city train station resecentrum to gothenburg city terminal nils ericsson terminal  train timetable
 walk to the bus terminal five minute walk at most
 change to the airport bus flygbussen
 arrive at gothenburg airportlandvetter  airport info
 dont forget about people in the digital transformation
 more and more companies are investing in digital tools and systems but they are not always prepared for the impact of the technology transition may have on employees working methods and management.
 the technology transition is in full swing within the swedish manufacturing industry. to improve efficiency and strengthen competitiveness production and various support functions are increasingly being digitalised. everyone who works within manufacturing faces changed roles and new ways of working. but how can digital transition be implemented in a sustainable manner? is there a risk that employees knowledge and experience will be lost? how is the manufacturing industry addressing the demand for new and changing skills?
 one contemporary challenge for businesses is to balance the interaction between people and technology in an increasingly digitalised industry explain anna karin and kristina. these businesses tend to focus mainly on technological advances and risk overlooking humancentric aspects.
 to ensure the success of the digital transition and to be able to build smarter factories effective interaction between people and technology is needed. employees knowledge and experience must be incorporated into the new digital tools. it is essential to understand just how complex introducing new technologies is.
 which issues have you focused on?
 the overall aim of the project has been to understand how employees  everyone from operators technicians and team leaders to the companys management  can contribute their experiences and perspectives to the digitalisation process.
 these processes cut across the organisation and require taking a more teambased approach. this brings many challenges which is why we have focused on discussing coworkership issues such as those linked to digitalisation leadership learning and innovation.
 the goal has been to create a deeper understanding of how industrial digitalisation can benefit from both human and artificial intelligence within the learning process with a particular focus on machine learning production flow simulations and interactive apps.
 how have you worked?
 together with siemens energy and gkn aerospace we initially identified key issues by holding workshops. during the course of the project we have collected and analysed various data such as production data indepth interviews and the results from focus groups with employees working in different professional roles. we then developed working models and identified critical factors for organising and learning.
 what is your most important advice for industrial companies in transition?
 recognise that people need to be at the heart of the digital transition if it is to succeed. make stepbystep changes rather than radical threatening organisational changes. make use of input in the form of common sense critical thinking tacit knowledge experienced judgment creativity etc.
 taking responsibility for industrial digitalisation is a challenge. in the transition from industry 4.0 to industry 5.0 it is essential to create an adaptive organisational culture with a focus on continuous learning and skills development.
 create engagement and interaction with colleagues from all functions and levels early on  both experts and nonexperts  to make it easier to build up organisational capabilities  and to ensure trust in strategic processes for digitalisation.
 contact anna karin olsson project manager for ahil university west.
 dream assignment for joel at one of the worlds largest conferences on superalloys
 joel andersson professor of materials science has the role of chairman of this years major international conference on superalloys. photo university west
 why is there so much interest in superalloy 718?
 this superalloy is widely used for various components in the aerospace industry but also in the chemical industry offshore and the energy sector. the alloy can withstand high temperatures high loads and aggressive environments and is also relatively weldable and castable which makes it perfectly suited for components in among other things aircraft engines.
 since the alloy is used to such a large extent there is a broad and great need to increase knowledge about the material.
 what is the conference about?
 what is included in the role of chairman?
 we are a whole group working to get the conference in place and i have had the honor of leading the work. this can for example be about invited speakers the organization of the conference review of articles and more.
 what does the conference mean to you?
 do you want to know more? contact joel andersson
 more about the conference superalloys 718  derivatives 2023
 sweden has raised the terror threat level from level 3 to level 4. university west follows and refers to the recommendations found on the msb and the swedish security service websites.
 the swedish  universities also have a continuous dialogue regarding security work and possible measures. university west has also dialogue with the city of trollhättan the police and the county administrative board.
 at university west continuous work is underway to ensure an accessible and safe campus where several measures are implemented based on both the local and national security situation among other things security guard presence has been made permanent on weekday evenings between 430  1100 p.m.
 the swedish security service urges individual citizens to live as usual but to be alert and to follow the information from the authorities. as far as the university is concerned ordinary security procedures apply.
 here you find more information
 säpo  the swedish security service
 msb  swedish civil contingencies agency
 the swedish police  raising general awareness of terrorism
 here you can read more about crisis and preparedness at university west
 during the education
 there are no university tuition fees for students who are citizens of sweden and the european unioneuropean economic area and switzerland. however you do need to cover the cost of your coursebooks and some other expenses. if a course involves abnormally high costs for the student then in some cases the university may be obliged to offer a free alternative. students from other countries known as thirdcountry students must pay tuition fees. the university sets the tuition fees at the start of each academic year. for exchange students there is no tuition fee.
 tuition fee waivers and scholarships
 third country students except students from certain countries receiving aid can apply for tuition fee waivers from the university. those who are successful in applying for a tuition fee waivers have their tuition fees reduced by the amount awarded. third country students certain countries can apply for full scholarship from the swedish institute. more information can be obtained at  .
 membership of the student union is voluntary. joining the student union gives you access to extra help and support with regard to various issues during your time as a student. you can also take part in the unions activities and find out about the discounts that the union has negotiated.
 you can contact the study and careers advisors with questions relating to your study situation and future career. for example you may have questions about the choice of courses or programmes how to organise your studies accreditation of prior studies taking a break from your studies or general questions about your choice of education and the future labour market.the advisors also offer a number of study support activities such as study techniques public speaking courses and cv lectures. furthermore international students can also get advice frominternational office or the international coordinator at their department.
 studies and work experience abroad
 university west currently has around 100 bilateral agreements with other educational institutions around the world. this means that as a student with us you will be given opportunities to study or gain work experience abroad as part of your programme. the university participates in various funding programmes regarding studieswork experience abroad which means that you can get help in the form of scholarships if you wish to studywork abroad. there are opportunities to apply to increase your student grant from csn to cover some of the costs.contact the international office at the student centre for further information.
 students are entitled to representation on all decisionmaking bodies and drafting committees. the student union elects these representatives.
 students and university employees are equally entitled to a healthy working environment. if you have any comments or questions about the working environment at the university you can contact the health and working environment committee. both university employees and students are represented on the committee.
 the student health centre which is based at the student centre has two counsellors. these people are here to provide help if you need support with a personal problem that may be affecting your studies. they also work with preventive measures in the form of seminars or courses.
 equalityequal treatmentdiversity
 no student or applicant should be subjected to victimisation at university west due to their gender transgender identity or expression ethnicity religion or other belief system sexual orientation disability or age. this is regulated under the discrimination act. the act contains regulations stating that within the remit of their activities universities must pursue focused work to actively promote equal rights for students and applicants.if you as a student feel that you have been discriminated against victimised or subjected to harassment you can contact the student ombudsman who is based at the student union student health centre or student centre to get help and support.
 curricula and syllabuses
 the content of your programme is regulated in the first instance by the curriculum and the relevant syllabuses for the courses. curricula and syllabuses are legally binding documents drawn up by the university and the education you have chosen should be run in accordance with these documents.curriculum each educational programme has a curriculum. the curriculum sets out for example what previous knowledge is required and what courses are included.syllabus each course has a syllabus. the syllabus provides details of entry requirements the objectives of the course and how examinations are conducted.
 a course memorandum is published before the start of each course. the memorandum contains detailed information about the design of the course and how examinations are conducted.
 if you are about to begin a new programme or a new independent course you should register according to the information in your welcome letter. if you do not register you will lose your place and it will be offered to another student.this is why you must register each time you start a new course. registration is carried out in connection with your first lectureseminar on each individual course. if you are unable to attend on the first occasion then you need to contact the course administrator for the department in question. students studying a webbased programme or webbased course will receive information about registration via the course tool canvas see below under support system for each course.
 if you leave your studies before the education has finished then you need to inform the university on a special form. if you submit the form no later than three weeks in to the course or programme then you will be given the opportunity to apply again at a later date.
 ladok is a national database for university study documentation. ladok contains students personal data details of their qualifications admissions course registrations results credits study breaks studies abroad and degrees. the information in ladok enables you to follow your studies. you can view your registrations and results via ladoks online services. read more and login to ladok.where does the information in ladok come from? the information in the system comes from several sources. for example admissions enters personal details and information about the qualifications of students who have been offered a place. details about admissions and qualifications are also transferred to ladok from the swedish agency for higher education services admissions system nya. the course administrators enter registration details and results and the examination officers report the degrees awarded. students registered addresses are taken from spar the swedish population register a few times a year. you can also submit changes of address to the student centre yourself.what if theres an error in ladok? a considerable amount of the information in ladok is entered manually. it is important that students check all the information carefully. if you discover an error contact the course administrator at the department in question and request that the information be rectified.
 kursinfo is university wests educational database. it contains information about syllabuses including reading lists curricula and basic details of planned and advertised courses and programmes offered by university west.
 canvas is the universitys educational learning platform. you can find course material discussion platforms etc. here for most courses and you can also contact your teachers via canvas.
 if you are pursuing studies at university west you can if you have special reasons be granted a study break with your place guaranteed. special reasons may include social medical or other particular circumstances such as caring for a child military or civil service or student union assignments.if your place is not guaranteed then the decision can be appealed against at the higher education appeals board.
 individual study plan
 if for some reason you need to deviate from the normal study plan it may be appropriate to set up an individual study plan. the plan states which courses you need to study in order to graduate from the education for which you have a place. individual study plans can for example be appropriate following a study break.
 accreditation means that you can use approved courses completed at another educational institution towards your degree. the same also applies if you have attained the knowledge and skills required for those courses for which you are seeking accreditation via a different route for instance studies abroad. students registered at university west will receive recognition of approved courses from higher education institutions hei abroad towards their degree. recognition is done in accordance with the learning agreement and transcript of records and entered in the study documentation system ladok. if the host hei uses ects credits this will always be accepted as the mutual conversion factor. if not there are documented regulations for transforming credits to our system. credits can only be acknowledged for the same course once. for traineeships a signed agreement with the enterprise is needed. transcript of records achieved at university west will be sent to the international office of the partner institutions for all incoming students after the mobility. if your application for accreditation is rejected you can appeal against the decision at the higher education appeals board.
 the university uses a central system for timetabling. teaching during the day is conducted monday ? friday 8.00 a.m. ? 6.00 p.m. the timetable is published online  two weeks prior to the start of the course. the timetable can be amended for example there may be room changes at short notice. you should therefore keep yourself informed via the website and by consulting the timetables displayed at the university entrances.
 exemption from compulsory parts of the course
 if for religious ethical or other reasons you find yourself unable to participate in a compulsory aspect of the course you may apply for exemption.if your application is rejected the decision can be appealed against at the higher education appeals board.
 the grading system is related to goals. there are four different grading scales at university west. the grading system that applies to your course is detailed in your course syllabus.
 written examinations
 university west coordinates written examinations centrally. the examination timetable is usually presented in connection with the start of the course. any written examinations appear in the course schedule. there is also a complete examination timetable for the entire term on the website. examinations can take place during the day and in the evening monday ? saturday. for more detailed information about how the examination periods are allocated across the year see under academic year planning. please note that registration is compulsory for written examinations taken on university west campus. you can register from between 25 and 8 days before the examination. if you have not registered the only possibility to take the exam is if there are seats and examination theses available at the time for examination. the course supervisor will inform you of the result after your exam paper has been marked. you can then collect your written marked exam paper from the student centre. you must show a valid form of id when you collect your exam paper. please note that any exam papers not collected after two years are destroyed.for more detailed information about procedures with regard to written examinations see instructions for examinations distance examinations examinations at another location and return of exam papers.
 in some cases it may be compulsory to register for another type of examination for example a home examination. this could apply to both students studying on campus and those on distance learning courses for example a webbased course. in such cases the teacher responsible will inform the student group. you will also find these examination times on min sida.
 registration of study results
 after you have taken the examination on a course the results are entered into the ladok database. when the examiner has signed the list of records then you will be able to view your results in the student portal.if the course is divided up into several modules all modules must be reported with a pass in order for a grade to be reported for the entire course.
 examination review
 if you are dissatisfied with the assessment of an examination you can request that the results be reviewed by an examiner. objections to the results should be submitted in writing with an explanation to the examiner.
 right to retake exams
 the basic principle is that you can take an exam an unlimited number of times as long as the course is offered at university west. you are entitled to be examined according to the syllabus for the course on which you are enrolled on one standard occasion and on an additional occasion in connection with the course reexamination while the course is ongoing. additional opportunities for retakes are made available in cases where the course is resumed at university west but in such cases the examination takes place in accordance with the current syllabus for the course. it is your responsibility to keep up to date about changes in the course. when the courses is discontinued there are three additional opportunities for retakes during a period of at least one year following the final exam for the course.
 restrictions to the number of examination opportunities
 it is possible to restrict the number of examinations. if this is the case it should be stated in the syllabus. however the total number of examination opportunities for a course should never be less than five.
 the syllabus should clearly state if there is a restricted number of opportunities for work experience or equivalent training periods however there should be at least two opportunities for work experience or equivalent training periods.
 disciplinary measures
 a student who deliberately misleads during an examination cheats or disrupts teaching or examination procedures can be excluded from the studies by the disciplinary board for a limited period of time or be issued with a warning. the disciplinary board makes decisions in such cases on behalf of the university. the board consists of the vicechancellor a lawyer and representatives from among the teaching staff and students. the same applies for any student who prevents or disrupts activities at the university or who subjects an employee or other student at the university to harassment. decisions made by the disciplinary board can be appealed against at an administrative court. you find more information at the page about examinations.
 if a student who is suffering from a mental disorder or who has committed a serious crime or is abusing alcohol or drugs is considered to be a danger to other people or to property during their education the student may be suspended from the studies. such cases are investigated and a decision is made by the higher education suspensions board which is a national board for all swedish universities.
 a course evaluation is carried out at the end of each course. the purpose is to gather students views in order to further develop the course and make improvements. from the autumn term 2011 we will be using the electronic course evaluation system evasys. the results will be compiled in a course evaluation report which is available to all students.
 when you have been accepted onto a course you are entitled to a course certificate. in order to receive your course certificate you need to contact the student centre via email studentcentrum@hv.se. you will need to state your personal identity number address and the name of the course in question and we will send your course certificate to your home address. if the university rejects your request you can appeal against the decision at the higher education appeals board.
 all degrees require you to write a thesis. the length of the thesis varies depending on the degree. the general principle is that the bulk of your studies should have been completed before work on your thesis begins. a thesis includes planning implementing and reporting a study defending it during a seminar and critically examining and discussing the content of a thesis that has been written by one or more students at the same level. the thesis is written by an individual or a maximum of two students together. the overarching goal of the thesis is for the student to adopt a scientific approach which involves the ability to assess information independently and critically the ability to resolve a problem independently to follow knowledge trends and exchange knowledge at a scientific level.
 system of qualifications
 the universitys regulations for issuing degrees are set out in the universitys system of qualifications. section a contains general rules on degrees and section b details which degrees are issued at university west. the appendix to the system of qualifications states which majors and specialization there are for each degree.
 after completing your education you must apply to receive your degree certificate. in order to receive a degree certificate you must satisfy the requirements stated in the system of qualifications andor curriculum. if the university rejects your request you can appeal against the decision at the higher education appeals board.
 changes may be made to the handbook during the year. the current version is always available on the university website.
 during the exchange
 if your course selection changes you must update your learning agreement and send it directly to your departmental coordinator in order to get the revised selection approved.
 remember that you represent university west. be a good ambassador by encouraging students to come to trollhättan. attend study abroad fairs information meetings if they are available and spread information about university west. contact international office if you need brochures or material for a study abroad fair for example.
 if you for some reason consider terminating your studies abroad it is very important that you contact us. in some cases the change of environment can be overwhelming and it is normal to feel unsure of your situation  so do contact us before you decide anything.
 through the continued work the project gets a greater focus on fullscale dynamic verified experiments of the new solutions within the electric powertrain. this proposed continuation of edrive means a longterm investment by university west to support regional industry within the focus area. the aim is to build competence at university west and a longterm and sustainable collaboration between the academy and the automotive industry large companies and smes which results in a strengthened competitiveness and competence supply with the base in trollhättan.
 examinationer
 in  what  way  will  digitalization  in  general  and  iot  in  particular  change  industrial  work  and  its conditions for lead and learn?
 how  will  future  organization  and  management  of  digital  innovation  and  learning  in  the manufacturing industry be effectively supported?
 education at advanced level
 there  is  a  need  to  develop  organise  and  give  courses  for  the  new  master  programs  in  informatics  and  design  as  well  as  business  administration  and  leadership.  these  two  master  programs  are  part  of  the strategic  work  to  ensure  recruitment  of  ph.d.  students  and  to  provide  the  industry  with  state  of  the  art  designers and managers in the field of digital transformation in industry. important education tasks include
 participate in development of new courses at advanced level
 give courses at advanced level and supervise and manage studentindustry projects
 digitalization of course content and material on advanced level
 office 365 email
 email  the first time you log in
 the first time you log into your email you have to change some settings including selecting the language and time zone.
 follow these steps
 log in to your student email. read about how to log in to  email and other microsoft 365 services here please note never check remember me or remember my password when you use a public computer.
 select your language and time zone. choose time zone  gmt  01 00 if you are in sweden.
 emeeting service canvas
 emeeting  this is how it works
 we recommend that you use your computer to follow your lecture via zoom
 to connect to the course emeeting do the following
 click this is the link to our zoom room
 click join with computer audio
 now youre in the meeting
 use headset or mobile earphones
 when using a computer and connecting to the emeeting for the first time zooms desktop app will be downloaded. if you are using zoom on a mobile device you can download the app from the appstore or google play or you can also connect to zoom through the mobile web browser.
 the emeeting service zoom is used for networkbased meetings eseminars tutoring and group work.
 the requirements for being able to lead and  or attend a zoom meeting is that you have
 internetconnected computer
 headset with microphone
 in our learning platform canvas we use zoom for emeetings. to connect to an emeeting follow these steps
 go to your course on canvas and click on the zoomroom link in the zoom module.
 a new window will open automatically or manually depending on your web browser.
 allow cookies and proceed.
 if its your first time entering a zoom meeting the zoom client will now be downloaded.
 once the download is complete press run.
 connect your audio by clicking on join with computer audio.
 now you are in the meeting.
 the video describes how to connect to an emeeting i zoom. english subtitles are available.
 inside the emeeting room
 tools for the meeting can be found in the list at the bottom of the window. the list becomes active as soon as you move the mouse. here is where you start and stop the camera and the microphone. make sure you have the correct audio device connected by clicking the small arrow to the right of the microphone symbol. to leave the meeting click leave meeting.
 short videos about basic functions in zoom
 the videos have english subtitles.
 how do i activate audio and webcam?
 how do i see the participant list and how do i use the chat?
 how do i display documents?
 how do i change the layout?
 how do i choose a breakout room?
 how do i log in to zoom i dont have a zoom account?
 you can participate in a zoom meeting even if you dont have a zoom account. this video describes how you can join an emeeting without a zoom account.
 using zoom without canvas
 first you need to download the zoom client and install it on your computer. if you have previously used zoom via canvas the client is already installed and you have a zoom icon on your desktop. in that case go directly to the paragraph how to enter zoom.
 go to the zoom download page
 click download and install the zoom client for meetings
 now you have got a zoom icon on your computer desktop
 start the zoom client by clicking the zoom icon on your computers desktop
 click sign in please note not join meeting
 select sign in with sso
 a dialogue box pops up. in the field enter your company domain type hvse click continue
 log in with your university west account
 now the zoom panel starts. the zoom web page that pops up can be closed
 now youre ready to create an emeeting
 create emeeting
 click schedule in the zoom panel
 fill in your meeting details and click schedule
 a meeting request is opened. fill in the names of the participants and send the meeting request
 create emeeting on the website
 recurring emeeting
 how to enter the emeeting
 enter the emeeting by clicking the link in your booking. the creator of the emeeting can also enter the meeting via the zoom panel meetings.
 if you want to know more about the possibilities that zoom can give you as a student take a look at  zooms own support material.
 välj sign in with sso
 exchanges studies through erasmus
 if you have been admitted to exchange studies within erasmus programme for studies within euees we have listed below what steps you should follow next. you need to read this information carefully so that you know what documentation is required from you and what documents you need to obtain for your studies abroad.
 i have been accepted for studies within the erasmus programme  what next?
 find out what experiences other student have had from studies at the specific university and take the opportunity to contact them
 information before applying to the partner university
 you will receive an invitation for an information meeting. at this meeting you will receive information on what will happen next  and we will go through more details on the information listed below. this is also a good opportunity for you to ask questions you may have.
 international office will nominate you to the partner university. once this is done you will receive a confirmation and the partner university will send you information on how you apply and which courses they offer to exchange students for example.
 all documentation and communication is managed through the mobilityonline system in which you created an account before you completed your application for exchange studies. you will be able to follow a workflow in the system where you can see what needs to be done or will happen next.
 application for studies at the partner university
 next step is for you to apply for exchange studies at the partner university. follow their instructions and deadlines.
 language test ols this test is mandatory and is made online once prior to departure you will receive a link by email that you use to do the test. the purpose is to assess your english knowledge and does not affect the admission of your exchange place.
 learning agreement you must always verify that the courses you have chosen can be recognized here at home before you leave. for this reason you need to fill out a learning agreement and get it approved and signed by your programme director or departmental coordinator in good time before you depart. once back home you will need your final version of learning agreement together with your transcript of records from the partner university in order to apply for recognition of your exchange studies at the degree office university west. you create your learning agreement in moblityonline as part of the process before going abroad.
 transcript of records ladok your transcript of records for studies here at university west you can download from my pages. make sure to download the english version. should the partner university require a signed transcript unusual but it happens you can get this from service center.
 english proficiency letter this certificate which states your language level may be required for application to some partner universities. for this reason all accepted exchange students will receive this documentation from us at the international office  but it may be that your university does not require it.pedagogical supportif you have a nais confirmation and receive targeted pedagogical support today at university west you need to contact the partner university you wish to apply for in good time to find out what support you can receive from there.should you need your naisconfirmation translated into english or have other questions please contact the coordinator for support to student with disabilities funka@hv.se
 i have been accepted to the partner university
 in order to receive the first payment from your scholarhip you need to hand in a grant agreement. you download this from your mobilityonline workflow and upload it into the system once you have signed. the agreement is based on the dates of your study period abroad and you should also include dates for introduction etc. in the period of study.
 if applicable csn student finance apply for student finance for the whole academic year even if you are only planning to study one semester abroad. since it takes longer to process the credits from abroad studies it is an advantage to have applied to csn for a full academic year. in this way csn will not followup on the number of credits you have achieved abroad directly once the semester is completed.read more at csn web pages.please note that questions on student finance and eligibility etc must be adressed directly to csn. international office are not able to provide support on this.
 registration on exchange studies at your home university in ladok
 you will receive an email from us when you can register for exchange studies under my pages. without registration you are not eligible for funds from csn and are also not covered by kammarkollegiets insurance below so dont forget to do this
 accommodation arrival registration etc at the partner university
 questions related to accommdation arrival registration on courses introduction days at the partner university  all practical issues related to your studies andor stay abroad needs to be handled by the partner university. if you are unsure of whom to contact or you dont have contact information you can email us at international@hv.se and we will send contact details to you.
 as a student at university west you are insured by kammarkollegiet state insurance student ut. you may need to add an additional home insurance to cover expensive equipment for example. more information on the insurance kammarkollegiet student ut. you will receive the insurance documentation from us through mobilityonline before your departure.
 if you are an eu citizen and you travel within eu  dont forget to bring your eu health insurance card. in sweden you order this from försäkringskassan.if you have a valid kammarkollegiet insurance sos international in copenhagen can help you no matter where you are.
 great dont forget to get the first section of your confirmation of attendance signed by the partner university. you can download this form from your mobilityonline account though the menu on the lefthand side.
 learning agreement if your course selection changes you must update your course selection in mobilityonline in the section during the mobility and approve it in order for your departmental coordinator to be notivied and able to process the changes.
 have you been feeling ill or needed to use the studentout insurance by kammarkollegiet? in order to benefit from the insurance you need to fill out a claim form.
 cancellationinterruption of studies abroad
 if you for some reason should need to terminate your studies abroad it is very important that you contact international office.sometimes the change of environment can be overwhelming and it is normal to feel unsure of your situation  so dont hesitate to contact us about your thoughts before you decide on anything.
 etwinning is an online community which can be found on the platform esep european school education platform.
 it offers opportunities for staff teachers head teachers librarians etc. working in a school or in an initial teacher training institute in one of the european countries involved to communicate collaborate develop projects share and in short feel and be part of the most exciting learning community in europe.
 etwinning is cofunded by the erasmus the european programme for education training youth and sport.
 for more information contact etwinning ambassador georgia wilhelmsson at university west.
 wire arc additive manufacturing using highstrength steel tubular and solid wires
 wire laser metal deposition of 22 cr duplex stainless steel  asdeposited and heattreated microstructure and mechanical properties
 microstructure of laser metal deposited duplex stainless steel  influence of shielding gas and heat treatment
 improving fatigue properties of welded high strength steels
 improving fatigue strength of welded 1300 mpa yield strength steel using hfmi treatment or ltt fillers
 effect of high frequency mechanical impact treatment on fatigue strength of welded 1300 mpa yield strength steel
 fatigue strength of welds in 800 mpa yield strength steels  effects of weld toe geometry and residual stress
 microstructural analysis of laser cladding of stellite 6 on ductile iron
 nondestructive measurement of weld toe radius using weld impression analysis laser scanning profiling and structured light projection methods
 effect of postweld heat treatment on mechanical and microstructural properties of high strength steel weld metal
 wire laser metal deposition additive manufacturing of duplex stainless steel components development of a systematic methodology
 comparison of effect of shotpeening with hfmi treatment or use of ltt consumables on fatigue strength of 1300 mpa yield strength steel weldments
 neutron diffraction evaluation of near surface residual stresses at welds in 1300 mpa yield strength steel
 applicability of low transformation temperature welding consumables to increase fatigue strength of welded high strength steels
 effect of hfmi treatment procedure on weld toe geometry and fatigue properties of high strength steel welds
 the relative effects of residual stresses and weld toe geometry on fatigue life of weldments
 the measurement of weld toe radius using three nondestructive techniques
 increasing fatigue life using low transformation temperature ltt welding consumables
 ecocoat  towards environmentally friendly heavyduty vehicle engines engineered thermal spray coatings
 ecogate  engineered coatings for next generation gas turbine components
 this project is a first attempt to produce protective coatings on substrates that result from new technologies and materials and are currently explored in the gas turbine industry aiming at finding alternative solutions to the conventional structural parts used today so that significant improvements in engine efficiency and reduced gas emissions can be attained.
 these substrates are metallic parts produced by additive manufacturing am and parts made of ceramic matrix composite cmc. the surface of such parts has special characteristics from both material and surface topography points of view thus the coatings and coating techniques needs to be designed and adapted accordingly. the main goal of this project is to explore and develop high temperatures protective coatings on am and cmc substrates.
 the project will focus mostly on surface preparation design and deposition of the coatings as well as on common coating characterisation. the complementary experience and expertise of a carefully chosen network of industrial partners is enabled in this projects to accomplish the above and thereby address the industrial demands for the new type of coatings.
 the following collaboration partners covering the entire value chain has been established university west uw a leading thermal spray academic rd group in sweden höganäs ab höganäs a global leader in development of feedstock materials for thermal spraying gkn aerospace gkn a leading company in developing coatings for gas turbine applications siemens industrial turbomachinery ab siemens one of the worlds largest suppliers of power plants and turbines curtisswright surface technologies ab cwst a company with long experience in providing surface engineering solutions for various industrial applications.
 60 hp of which 45 hp in economics including
 cfb300  corporate finance 7.5 he credits and
 surfing instructor
 hansson kristofer amp irwin rachel red. 2020. movement of knowledge medical humanities perspectives on medicine science and experience. lund sweden nordic academic press
 interpreting the brain in society. cultural reflections on neuroscientific practices. hansson kristoffer amp idvall marcus eds. lund arkiv förlag 2017 svenska
 crossborder alcohol contacts  anders gustavsson historical changes in alcohol contacts across the swedishnorwegian border.novus press oslo 2019. 61 pp. ill. 9788283900101
 the paradoxical world of trucking
 recension sensitive objects. affect and material culture. jonas frykman amp maja povrzanovic frykman red. 2016. lund nordic academic press. 285 s. ill. isbn 9789187675669.
 becoming an innovative tourism destination theoretical concepts for sustainable growth in the tourism industry
 becoming a creative destination  theories for promoting and make use of innovation
 beyond the new university
 gustavsson anders 2021. improper use moderation or total abstinence of alcohol  use of and opinion on alcohol especially in the western swedish countryside and coastal regions during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. strömstad strömstad academy nordic institute of advanced studies.
 andréa wismeg cells in culture cells in suspence
 the culture of neuroscience  interpreting the brain in society. cultural reflectionson neuroscientific practices. kristofer hanssonamp marcus idvall eds.. arkiv förlag lund2017. 167 pp. ill. 9789179242930
 a conversation about work integrated learning as a way to manage complexity and promote sustainability
 best practice in destination development is always a different practice
 the atomized body. the cultural life of stem cells genes and neurons. max liljefors susanne lundin amp andréa wiszmeg red.. nordic academic press lund 2012. 228s. ill. isbn 9789187121920
 becoming a sustainable tourism destination  theoretical concepts to work with and things to consider
 lets have a conversation about the new university
 inside the new university  prerequisites for a contemporary knowledge production
 how to grasp learning in between
 education and student involvement
 our programmes and courses educate students who develop knowledge and competence that is needed in climate adaptation.
 concrete skills and abilities connected to the climate issue are part of their education but also the ability to describe analyse and understand complex contexts and together with others find solutions to the situation in which we find ourselves. it is also important that students become interested and engaged in climate and sustainability issues during their studies and do so in a context that is characterized by interdisciplinary collaboration as well as collaboration with the surrounding community.
 objective our programmes develop students ability to contribute to climate adaptation in their future profession.
 objective the university will make the most of students enthusiasm when it comes to climate issues and offer them the opportunity to contribute to the universitys and other organisations work with sustainability through wil.
 the sustainability perspective will be integrated into the current wil certification of programmes where students are given the opportunity to test and develop their knowledge in various types of projects. this can for example be a project connected to campus development or a job that is connected to sustainability that they carry out for an employer.
 education child and youth studies
 masters program  in child and youth studies parttime 2 years
 the masters program in child and youth studies is an online distance learning and parttime 50 degree program which is completely taught in english. the program is available as a 2year 60 he credits program.
 throughout the program the learning development and conditions of children and young people are studied in different settings such as school family and local communities and in different cultural and national contexts. the program is based on the idea that children are active and competent agents in their own lives and that they are both influenced by and influencing their social worlds.
 as the social worlds of children and youth are growing due to issues such as globalization migration and social media these issues are addressed in uptodate courses throughout the program.
 the child and youth studies program is multidisciplinary combining knowledge from various disciplines such as sociology social work psychology and education among others. that means that knowledge about children and youth from different perspectives and professions is integrated in order to deepen and broaden our understanding. the aim of the programs is to provide the theoretical methodological and practical tools to participate in develop promote and improve activities and interventions aimed at children and youth.
 why study master in child and youth studies at university west?
 a unique international and multidisciplinary masters degree programme in the field of child and youth studies
 a parttime online programme making it possible to study when it suits you and combine work and studies
 an international learning environment with students and staff from all over the world
 the possibility of studying at another university in your country of residence or abroad
 master of arts ma 60 or 120 credits with a major in child and youth studies
 babsc in education or nursing 180 credits or
 bachelors degree 180 credits with a major in for example social work and social pedagogy psychology pedagogics sociology culture studies or public health or the equivalent
 the equivalent of english studies at the upper secondary high school level in sweden called english 6 or english b.
 tuition fees
 50000 sek approx.  4650 per year
 educational efforts aimed at the business world and educational programs
 the purpose of this project is to create collaborations and find synergies between the two institutions of higher learning university west and uppsala university as well as relevant industry partners regarding the definition of skills shortages and the development of educational materials for independent courses in electrical engineering aimed at professionals.
 advanced level education in electrical engineering is in strong demand from the industry as that competence is absolutely necessary for business climate change and for the electrification of society. the challenges in the energy system are growing as electricity production from unplanned sources increases sharply transmission of electricity takes place over ever longer distances and the electrified society demands ever higher electricity consumption. the electrification of society where the electrification of vehicles is an important part also leads to challenges and the need for new skills. the purpose of this project is to create collaborations and find synergies between the two institutions of higher learning university west and uppsala university as well as relevant industry partners regarding the definition of skills shortages and the development of educational materials for independent courses in electrical engineering aimed at professionals. the courses will be offered as individual courses course packages and complete masters education.
 study and academic support library and educational development
 educational support and development
 pedagogical development ict support and academic writing
 educational support and development is led by division head lars johansson.
 the division includes functions that support both students and teachers at university west and acts as a hub for teachers continuous pedagogical development.
 at akademus we gather all support for pedagogical development that higher education pedagogy ict pedagogues and media technicians offer. at akademus you will find courses workshops seminars together with news inspiration and bookable guidance with a focus on the development of pedagogical work.
 the language resource center is for any student or staff who needs to develop their ability to read and write academic texts and conducts individual tutoring as well as lecture sessions and group tutoring.
 the department also manages the schools various educational systems such as canvas zoom hvplay etc. and assists with professional media production support for the universitys various events both physical and digital.
 head of the division
 effective crisis management only possible with adaptive organization
 the care required during the pandemic differed from the care normally provided. in a major accident a rescue leader at the accident site calls an oncall official in the region who then distributes patients between hospitals ensuring those who need the most care get it.
 at the beginning of the pandemic it was the icu managers who were in contact with colleagues in italy and learned about the severe situation. when patients started arriving at hospitals the regions decided to open external icu departments. at the hospitals they preferred to use the surgery unit because of its familiar environment and this was possible when planned operations had been canceled.
 the pandemic lasted a long time and the healthcare needs changed in waves unlike an accident which is usually short and sudden. in the thesis ritva could show that the decision hierarchy during the pandemic worked better if it was delegated rather than centralized. every day new situations arose that were unfamiliar to doctors who did not know how to care for the patients. experienced doctors said it felt like they were thrown back to their internship.
 the organization needed to be adaptive rather than rigid. they had to learn what worked and didnt know which competencies were needed when. additionally the pandemic came in waves so between waves they returned to regular care. in this strange situation they greatly benefited from each others work. among other things medical associations held webinars on wednesdays where they shared the latest findings says ritva.
 there was a lack of initiative from the authorities in disseminating knowledge. medical journals published articles without review to get information out as quickly as possible. it was judged that the benefits outweighed the disadvantages even if there was no fully established evidence.
 three crucial consequences
 in the study ritva conducted both qualitative interviews and a quantitative survey with inductive exploratory and deductive analysis methods. in the study she identified three crucial needs of adaptive leadership during a prolonged event like the pandemic how prepared the organization was how the early phase was handled and what resources they had in terms of materials personnel and facilities.
 good crisis preparedness requires a low occupancy rate something we dont have in sweden today. it is difficult because low occupancy costs money. but things that can be done in preparation include making agreements on how to move staff in a crisis. the organization could also train staff in other tasks beforehand such as icu care.
 in the early phase it is important to gather as much information as possible and to identify who suddenly gets a heavy workload where there is excess staff and who needs to learn things. those with specialized skills must stay where they are needed most and get all the capacity they need meetings should be frequent but short and preferably digital.
 you should not have a rigid plan you should have a plan to make a plan because you dont know what you need says ritva.
 lessons for the future
 could the pandemic have been handled differently given the conditions?
 it would obviously have been good to understand earlier that even healthcare staff infected each other but there was a need to save on protective equipment. the organizations could have been quicker to train the category of staff that had too little to do. they learned as time went on and learning turned out to be a key factor along with positive storytelling. if the staff who moved to the icu for example could return to their department with an okay picture it motivated others to move.
 for the thesis capacity management in swedish hospitals during the covid19 pandemic.
 contact ritva rosenbäck doctor in production technlogoy university west 46 73089 70 69 ritva.rosenback@hv.se
 effectiveness of an mhealth intervention for overweight and obesity prevention in schoolgoing youth
 the dramatic increase in obesity documented in sa and many other countries creates a need to understand the behavioral psychological and environmental determinants of obesity in emerging economies and use that knowledge to design and test an mhealth intervention and hence decrease the prevalence of risk factors reducing mortality and morbidity.
 the studys main objectives are
 build upon the literature review from the first collaboration and apply for international grantfunding.
 examine the prevalence of overweightobesity among sa adolescents by race sex school status etc. and prevalence of risk factors behavioural psychological and environmental among sa and swedish adolescents
 examine the association between overweightobesity and risk factors
 devise an mhealth programme to provide support to change the healthrelated behaviour of overweightobese adolescents
 this proposal intends to use 3 workshops to achieve these objectives and develop a design prototype for an mhealth intervention to address the proliferation of obesity among schoolgoing youth.
 professor priscilla reddynelson mandela universitydr. tomas lindrothgothenburg universitydr. sherran clarencerhodes universitydr. lungile pepetanelson mandela university
 rhodes university
 efterlevnad av cybersäkerhet cybersecurity compliance
 efterlevnad av cybersäkerhet cybersecurity compliance  25 hp
 cybersecurity standards provide a structured approach to manage and assess cybersecurity risks. they are the primary source for security requirements and controls used by organizations to reduce the likelihood and the impact of cybersecurity attacks. however the large number of available cybersecurity standards and frameworks make the selection of the right security standards for a specific system challenging. organizations must navigate this complexity by choosing the most fitting security controls tailored to their specific needs aiming to streamline and clarify the compliance process. this course offers a comprehensive overview of cybersecurity policies and standards highlighting the significance of cyber policies and emphasizing the challenges inherent in complying with cybersecurity standards. furthermore it explores how connected devices and networks attain a baseline security level in accordance to evolving cybersecurity standards.
 this course provides an overview of cybersecurity policies and standards. the course identifies policies rules and procedures that ensure connected devices and networks meet an acceptable level of security based on emerging cybersecurity standards andframeworks.
 three years of higher education bachelor level in engineering  technology bachelor degree corresponding to 180cp including at least 2.5 cp credits in cybersecurity or equivalent. alternatively relevant professional work experience.
 cybersecurity standards provide a structured approach to manage and assess cybersecurity risks. they are the primary source for security requirements and controls used by organizations to reduce the likelihood and the impact of cybersecurity attacks. however the large number of available cybersecurity standards and frameworks make the selection of the right security standards for a specific system challenging. organizations must navigate this complexity by choosing the most fitting security controls tailored to their specific needs aiming to streamline and clarify the compliance process.
 this course offers a comprehensive overview of cybersecurity policies and standards highlighting the significance of cyber policies and emphasizing the challenges inherent in complying with cybersecurity standards. furthermore it explores how connected devices and networks attain a baseline security level in accordance to evolving cybersecurity standards.
 this course has been developed in collaboration with industry within the framework of one of our educational projects. the project aims to provide courses at advanced level to a mix of students and professionals in order to strengthen the competitiveness of swedish industry.
 we apply validation of work experience to see if you have knowledge that meets the eligibility requirements for the course. dont forget to attach your cv if you are applying based on your work experience the form is available on our website
 adnan abdul ghani support group network
 inam alghoul support group network.
 trollhättans muncipal housing company eidar ab has multiple apartment buildings where you have the chance to be placed. the buildings include lantmannavägen 38 blåvingen  skördetröskan and elefanten. buildings are subject to change due to availability.
 below you will find more information about the description of the eidar student apartments payment and termination information.
 studio apartments bedroom and kitchen are in the same room with a separate bathroom.
 2 rooms and a kitchen apartments 1 bedroom separate living room and kitchen with one bathroom.
 3 rooms and a kitchen apartments 2 bedrooms shared living room shared kitchen and a shared bathroom.
 termination period and rent
 rent is estimated to be around 4400sek6100sek per month and is subject to change each year.
 please do not try to pay the rent in cash since bank transfers are preferred.
 before arriving to your apartment you need to pay your rent. also rent is needed before the 1st of the month.
 if you would like to terminate your contract with eidar please look at your contract if there is a 1month or 3month termination period. once you have decided to terminate your contract please email both kundservice@eidar.se and accommodation@hv.se.
 amanda hadenius surveing engineering 180 he credits
 interview with amanda in english
 what was it like to be a student in the country how did it differ from being a student in sweden?
 being a student in france was quite different from what i was used to in sweden. all courses was mandatory and a letter from the doctor was required at absence from classes. the actual classes was also more controlled and strict compared to university classes in sweden.
 what did you think of the university? i.e. what was the courses like your teachers
 it was a bit of a mix i would say. some teachers was in my opinion not so inspiring and often quite angry whilst others did everything they could for us and for us to feel welcome.the courses was overall useful no matter what business you end up working in. focus was on management and how to carry out professional presentations but also how to cooperate in a group with a mix of different cultures. as the school also have a campus in casablanca morocco where they have an interprogramme exchange with la rochelle campus it gave us the opportunity to meet students from other cultures and learn more about these. not just class mates from france germany and spain  but also brazil morocco benin and congo.
 what was the city like? i.e. accommodation leisure activities
 the city was very pleasant approximately 70 000 inhabitants with a city centre located by the sea.all accommodation places were quite spread out so all my friends lived at different parts of the town which instead gave us a natural meeting point in the town centre.there were several sprots facilities museums restaurants and shops to visit. a student organisation arranged several surf trips and another organisation sent a letter each thursday for a chosen pub where everyone would get together.it is a city i would very much lite go back to
 what would you have needed to know before your stay abroad?
 i needed a birth certificate to apply for financial housing support supposedly some error occurred this year but it is a useful thing to know before you leave as the certificate is sent to the address in sweden where you are registered only.
 any advice to other students wanting to apply for exchange studies?
 it is a nice city with lots of different opportunitiesit can be quite windy and rainy so proper clothing is advisable. try to get in contact with french students as they know where the best places and activities are.finally just apply  it is a fantastic experience and if you are lucky you will find friends to last you a lifetime
 therese bohlin
 bachelor of science programme in business and economics
 mobility period possible during 5th semester of studies.
 europe studies within erasmus
 italyliuc universitá carlo cattneospainuniversity of barcelonabarcelona international university of catalonia uic
 united statessan josé state university sjsu
 eam510 15 hp
 ear510 15 hp
 strategisk human resource management
 electric machines for electric vehicles parttime campus efe600
 course content is basic electrical models for electric machines electrical and mechanical conditions for the most common electrical machines calculations on magnetic circuits delivered power and torque and the efficiency of the machine.
 ike100introduction to electric vehicle systems and components and
 gee100basics of electrical engineering for electric vehicles and
 rse100guidelines for safety when working on and in electric vehicles or the equivalent.
 this course provides an indepth understanding of electrical powertrains and their subsystems. the course highlights how different systems and components interact within the electrical powertrain and emphasizes advanced design calculations from a system perspective.
 mem500modeling of electric machines
 edf500electrical design of traction battery
 eld500power electronics and electric drive systems
 els600electrical solutions of auxiliary systems in vehicles
 hdp600sustainability  design and production of electric vehicles and
 sfe600control system for electric vehicles or the equivalent.
 as a result of the ongoing climate change electrification of society is required to reduce the use of fossil fuels where the electrification of both vehicles and industry as well as a robust power system will play an important role. this creates new challenges for industry to adapt to new technology and adapt existing systems to the new conditions.
 in general these changes are about shifting the business towards technology solutions and businesses that support the global goals around sustainability rise 2020. this changeover towards electrification brings high demands on the need for new areas of skills a need that has become increasingly relevant in recent years. examples of how this has been made visible include the employment protection act agreement lasavtalet in swedish from 2021 where prerequisites have been created for skills supply for companies in the industry and lifelong learning in the swedish labour market in general.
 university west has adjunct personnel that have a central role in industry with the work on the national and nordic stability in the power system. this is also closely connected to the european regulations and requirements for a stable power system.
 for electric vehicles the shift in technology from fossil fuels to an electrified driveline requires considerable changes in technologies and a shift in competence requirements for the industry. knowledge is required of among other things battery systems power electronics measurement systems control systems electromagnetic compatibility and electric motors as well as all conditions around that change.
 technology that meets all global sustainability goals
 the use of the magnetic material ferrite is a very important step towards a technical solution that meets the three global sustainability goals. design for reuse and recycling is also a very important part of the work.
 adaption to the power system of the future for small and mediumsized companies the project aims to spread knowledge among smaller companies about the need for future control of consumption and how financial control tools optimally utilized can provide great financial benefits.
 fyrbodal for the future of flex electrification and the flexible electricity system of the future have many different applications and applications. in this project we want to highlight three that have high relevance for society in general and the local power grids and energy systems in particular.
 the impact of the energy transition on voltage stability in the swedish power system
 the project aims to increase knowledge about how the energy transition with new production sources new consumption extended networks and varying power flows will affect the voltage stability in the power system and how the new production sources can actively contribute to increase the voltage stability.
 transient stability with increased share of renewable electricity production
 the project aims to increase knowledge about how the changes of the components in the grid extended networks and varying power flows will affect the transient stability in the power system and how the new production sources can contribute to transient stability.
 find our programmes taught in english
 find our programmes and courses taught in swedish
 latest articles in swedish
 upskilling courses in electrical engineering
 for engineers working in the automotive industry or the energy sector
 seminar series on the energy transition
 on how the energy transition will affect us in the future
 course content is interaction between electromagnetic fields and electric circuits transients high frequency behavior shielding and grounding.
 the course covers basic electrical theory. the focus is on basic electrical circuit analysis in dc and ac circuits including power and energy calculations. in addition theory and calculations on basic electronics are included. the following areas are covered
 basic electrical components such as batteries resistors capacitors inductors coils diodes and applications like rectifiers.
 basic circuit theory laws such as ohms and kirchhoffs laws singleports thévenin and norton superposition power and energy calculations.
 impedance phasors and knowledge about the complex method resonance active power reactive power and apparent power.
 how to sum power in and compensate for reactive power in ac circuits.
 rectifiers and operational amplifiers and their applications.
 alt100algebra and trigonometry or the equivalent.
 open for late application
 at elefanten with a unique location just 500 m from university west and the city center you find eidars largest student accommodation with 272 student studio apartments. the private studio apartments at elefanten all have its own kitchenette and bathroomwc. elefanten is a popular area with a short distance to several restaurants cafes pubs shops and entertainment such as cinema bowling or sports.
 about accommodation elefanten
 type of accommodation studios and onebedroom apartments
 number of studio apartments 257 studio apartments 15 onebedroom apartments
 distance to university west 500 m
 furnished a mixture
 rent studio apartments 4800 sek  6000 sek per month
 included heating cold water cable tv and broadband cable internet 100mbit. electricity and warm water will be charged seperately
 laundry room available in the basement.
 indoor bicycle storage in a seperate building
 some example impressions of the studio apartments at elefanten
 eldistribution
 study cybersecurity in sweden  shape the future of security
 the exceptional education system and breathtaking landscapes drew elena umbría macarrón all the way from spain to the slightly colder sweden. where she pursued her masters degree in cybersecurity at university west.
 so why did elena choose university west for her masters studies? elena explains i thought that the short duration was great because i was not sure if i wanted to continue studying or start working. so one year was the perfect timing. the programs duration allowed elena the flexibility to explore further academic pursuits or transition into the workforce.
 coming from the bustling metropolis of madrid she found solace in the smaller cozier atmosphere of trollhättan. she cherishes the proximity to nature the joy of engaging in outdoor activities like kayaking and the ease of getting around by bike. while shopping may require a trip to gothenburg or a nearby mall elenas love for nature and the friendly community she found in trollhättan compensates for any minor inconveniences.
 balance between academic focus and personal enjoyment is key to a wellrounded student experience. elena emphasizes the importance of socializing and spending time with friends whether it be playing games going for a run or participating in international dinners with fellow students.
 as a final note elena shares her appreciation for the life she built during her time in sweden stating its one year a lot of time to get used to a place. the routines friendships and personal growth that come with this transformative experience become cherished memories and a foundation for a successful future.
 rapid growth in the electric vehicle market is one of the prerequisites for meeting the global targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving air quality in urban cities.
 electric vehicles also meet consumers needs for a modern comfortable driving experience. the transition to batterypowered vehicles will radically change the automotive industry within a few years.
 the course is based on the increased need for batteries for electric vehicles. we handle a wide range of battery and vehicle types ranging from passenger cars to heavy construction vehicles and trucks.
 you get basic knowledge of different types of batteries. furthermore the course analyses the type of battery that is suitable for different types of vehicles and applications.
 the course ends with a case study in the form of practical risk analysis for battery management.
 the ongoing debate on global warming and climate change has created a craving for electric vehicles as a contribution to achieving the global greenhouse gas emission reduction targets and improving air quality in urban cities. this creates a need for more knowledge about battery management both in terms of manufacturing methods and recycling methods.
 the course aims to provide an understanding of how lithiumion batteries are manufactured. it also highlights how batteries that no longer work in vehicles can be reused for e.g. energy storage and how fully used batteries can be recycled. the course ends with a case study in the form of a life cycle analysis of a lithiumion battery.
 this course has been developed in collaboration with industry partners within the framework of one of our educational projects. the project aims to provide courses at advanced level to a mix of professionals and students to strengthen the swedish industrys competitiveness.
 therése eklund sandra hamadé
 investigating adolescents competence to consent to healthcare decisions  an interdisciplinary approach
 cathrin skogh
 christian olsson
 when freedom of choice is conditioned  a study of how immigrants with temporary residence permits articulate their life choices
 fatima mohamed ali
 informationskoordinator
 for english see below.
 i work with and strategically plan communication graphic layouts information user needs and web production for the sbip teams and services for example the library study counselling akademus digilab and more.
 illustrator within sbip illustration and fascilitation support.
 i also attend the library information desk a few times per week.
 i participate in following forums
 sbip information team coordinator
 library system team
 main web editors on university west
 university west webteam
 a theoretical framework for emancipatory nursing with a focus on environment and persons own and shared lifeworld
 discourses with potential to disrupt traditional nursing education  nursing teachers talk about normcritical competence
 work integrated learning and learning integrated work  an approach to unite theory and practice to praxis
 young women with anorexia nervosa
 perpetuating new public management at the expense of nurses patient education  a discourse analysis
 expert midwives experiences of security in their professional practice  im the captain of a jet
 workintegrated learning
 fathers of children with type 1 diabetes  perceptions of a fathers involvement from a health promotion perspective
 living in liminalitybeing simultaneously visible and invisible  caregivers narratives of palliative care.
 preoperative information provided to swedish and immigrant patients before total hip replacement
 the influence of gender in academia a case study of a university college in sweden
 if dad comes we are happy  if mom fails to appear we become desperate  a grounded theory study of swedish diabetes teams perecption of fathers involvement in their childs everyday life
 analysis of discourses in a health care context
 predominant discourses in swedish nursing
 constructing the normcritical awareness scale  a scale for use in educational contexts promoting awareness of prejudice discrimination and marginalisation
 ellinor tengelin christina cliffordson elisabeth dahlborg lyckhage ina berndtsson
 health care systems in transition equality access and health literacy in three scandinavian welfare states.  the emperors new clothes discourse analysis on how the patient is constructed in the new swedish patient act
 the emperors new clothes  discourse analysis on how the patient is constructed in the new swedish patient act.
 nursing teachers reflections on their own normcritical competence
 prerequisites for personcentered care  as described by community care nurses
 praxis and work integrated learning as pedagogical approach in nursing education
 from work integrated learning to learning integrated work  a pedagogical model to develop praxis in nursing education
 dont ask dont tell  battered women living in sweden encounter with healthcare personnel and their experience of the care given
 its about me  a narrative analysis of female smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease copd and their relationship to smoking
 swedish pediatric diabetes teams perception of fathers involvement  a grounded theory study
 fathers encounter of support from paediatric diabetes teams  the tension between general recommendations and personal experience
 lack of individualized perspective  a qualitative study of diabetes care for immigrants in sweden
 parents discursive resources  analysis of discourses in swedish danish and norwegian health care guidelines for children with diabetes type 1
 diabetes empowerment related to penders health promotion model  a metasynthesis
 the importance of awareness of nursing students denotative images of nursing
 staff member at department for studies of the individual and society.
 financial administration of externally funded projects on behalf of the department of engineering science such as
 yearly closing
 cost and income analysis
 requisitions and economic reporting
 work tasks diva information concerning copyright issues.  liasion librarian for school of business economics and it
 teacher information literacy
 workintegrated learning at university west  bibliographic review of the first 20 years with workintegrated learning
 the active learning classroom experience  a passion for collaboration in higher education
 interprofessional learning as work integrated learning  when conversations regarding databases and information literacy create a common base for professional learning
 the way to the wave  to integrate media and information literacy in the scientific wave throughout a bachelor program in business administration
 elisabeth ohlson
 the course deals with calculation of voltage dips in weak grids calculation of motor starts calculation of different forms of over voltages calculation of harmonics and different power quality index as well as calculation of different interruption indicators. the course also includes an orientation on government requirements and the application of standards.
 relationship learning in suppliercustomer relationships.
 identifying summer season segments on the swedish west coast  the case of lysekil
 tobias arvemo ellinor torsein
 internationalization of small firms originating from a crossborder region  the role of social and business networks
 identification of international opportunities  a study of mature firms in mature industries
 crossing the border in a crossborder region  the role of networks in small firms internationalization
 internationalization by means of networks  a case study of small firms in a crossborder region
 late season tourists on the swedish west coast
 email to smartphone  android
 please note the settings may differ depending on the phone model and version of the operating system.
 select settings accounts  sync
 press the add account
 select exchange activesync
 click in the box email and enter your full email address example firstname.lastname@student.hv.se.
 click in the box password and enter your password.
 click next
 check the box server address and type m.outlook.com
 click in the box username and enter your login name for office 365 student username@student.hv.se  staff username@hv.se
 select the type of information you want to sync. by default the synchronization of email contacts and calendar are turned on. to turn off synchronization for a type of information check the relevant boxes.
 click next.
 enter a user name optionally.
 click finish setup.
 if it does not work try with completing the field domain  student student.hv.se staff hv.se.
 email to smartphone  iphone
 if this is the first time you set up email account on your iphone press the button  icon mail. if you have other email accounts select settings mail contacts calendars  add account.
 press microsoft exchange
 click in the box username and enter your login name for office 365student username@student.hv.se staff username@hv.se
 optional tap in the description box and type a brief description of the account.
 click next in the upper right corner of the screen.
 click accept if a box with the text unable to verify certificate appears.
 click in the box server and enter m.outlook.com
 select the type of information you want to sync. by default mail calendar and contacts are turned on. to turn off synchronization for a type of information tap and slide the switch to off.
 if it does not work try with completing the field domain  student student.hv.se  staff hv.se.
 financial administration of externally funded projects on behalf of the department of economics and informatics and the department of social and behavioural studies.
 sbips infoteam
 management support for the sbip management team and administrative operational support for the unit. administration regarding courses connected to teaching and learning in higher education akademus and internal communication.
 working group for digilab in the library room
 team for teaching and learning in higher education
 project manager network
 i work with inhouse training and support functions for teachers and administrative staff related to digital tools recordings emeetings and the learning platform canvas.
 adolescents relationships with parents and romantic partners in eight countries.
 parents learning support and school attitudes in relation to adolescent academic identity and school performance in nine countries
 developmental trajectories of parental selfefficacy as children transition to adolescence in nine countries  latent growth curve analyses
 profiles of parental burnout around the globe  similarities and differences across 36 countries
 parents feelings distress and selfefficacy in response to social comparisons on social media
 three reasons why parental burnout is more prevalent in individualistic countries  a mediation study in 36 countries
 predicting adolescent mental health outcomes across cultures  a machine learning approach
 an examination of parents online activities and links to demographic characteristics among parents in sweden
 predicting child aggression  the role of parent and child endorsement of reactive aggression across 13 cultural groups in 9 nations.
 positive parenting adolescent adjustment and quality of adolescent diet in nine countries
 is adhd a way of conceptualizing longterm emotional stress and social disadvantage?
 soly erlandsson christoffer hornborg emma sorbring nicolas dauman
 study protocol for a mixeddesign evaluation of selfassured parents
 adolescent smoking alcohol use inebriation and use of narcotics during the covid19 pandemic.
 adolescent positivity and future orientation parental psychological control and young adult internalising behaviours during covid19 in nine countries
 parentadolescent relationship quality as a moderator of links between covid19 disruption and reported changes in mothers and young adults adjustment in five countries.
 four domains of parenting in sweden
 emma sorbring sevtap gurdal w. andrew rothenburg
 prepandemic psychological and behavioral predictors of responses to the covid19 pandemic in nine countries.
 parental burnout around the globe  a 42country study
 effects of parental acceptancerejection on childrens internalizing and externalizing behaviors  a longitudinal multicultural study
 w. andrew rothenberg sumbleen ali ronald p. rohner jennifer e. lansford preston. a. britner laura di giunta kenneth a. dodge patrick s. malone paul oburu concetta pastorelli ann t. skinner emma sorbring laurence steinberg sombat tapanya liliana maria uribe tirado saengduean yotanyamaneewong liane peña alampay suha m. alhassan dario bacchini marc h. bornstein lei chang kirby deaterdeckard
 parenting during adolescence as a moderator of links between covid19 disruption and reported changes in parents and young adults adjustment in five countries
 longitudinal trajectories of four domains of parenting in relation to adolescent age and puberty in nine countries
 crosscultural effects of parent warmth and control on aggression and rulebreaking from ages 8 to 13.
 w. andrew rothenberg jennifer e. lansford dario bacchini marc h. bornstein lei chang kirby deaterdeckard laura di giunta kenneth a. dodge patrick s. malone paul oburu concetta pastorelli ann t. skinner emma sorbring laurence steinberg sombat tapanya liliana maria uribe tirado saengduean yotanyamaneewong liane peña alampay suha m. alhassan
 how adolescents lives were disrupted over the course of the covid19 pandemic  a longitudinal investigation in 12 cultural groups in 9 nations from march 2020 to july 2022.
 w andrew rothenberg ann t skinner jennifer e lansford dario bacchini marc h bornstein lei chang kirby deaterdeckard laura di giunta kenneth a dodge sevtap gurdal daranee junla qin liu qian long paul oburu concetta pastorelli emma sorbring laurence steinberg liliana maria uribe tirado saengduean yotanyamaneewong liane peña alampay suha m alhassan
 cultural values parenting and child adjustment in sweden
 typicality and trajectories of problematic and positive behaviors over adolescence in eight countries.
 community series in the consequences of covid19 on the mental wellbeing of parents children and adolescents volume ii  editorial
 parenting adolescent sensation seeking and subsequent substance use  moderation by adolescent temperament
 a longitudinal examination of the family stress model of economic hardship in seven countries
 compliance with health recommendations and vaccine hesitancy during the covid pandemic in nine countries
 jennifer e. lansford w. andrew rothenberg saengduean yotanyamaneewong liane peña alampay suha m. alhassan dario bacchini marc h. bornstein lei chang kirby deaterdeckard laura di giunta kenneth a. dodge sevtap gurdal qin liu qian long glen morgenstern paul oburu concetta pastorelli ann t. skinner emma sorbring sombat tapanya laurence steinberg l.m. uribe tirado
 mixed blessings  parental religiousness parenting and child adjustment in global perspective
 editorial  the consequences of covid19 on the mental wellbeing of parents children and adolescents
 the intergenerational transmission of maladaptive parenting and its impact on child mental health  examining crosscultural mediating pathways and moderating protective factors
 culture and social change in mothers and fathers individualism collectivism and parenting attitudes
 household income loss parental depression and adolescent internalizingexternalizing behavior  a longitudinal study in seven countries.
 dialectical processes in parentchild relationships among somali families in sweden
 change in caregivers attitudes and use of corporal punishment following a legal ban  a multicountry longitudinal comparison
 positive youth development  parental warmth values and prosocial behavior in 11 cultural groups
 parallel growth of childrens internalizing behaviors predicted by positive parenting behaviors
 reported changes in adolescent psychosocial functioning during the covid19 outbreak
 associations between perceived material deprivation parents discipline practices and childrens behavior problems  an international perspective.
 empire  improved material properties in lithiumion battery joints
 as the number of electric vehicles on the worlds roads increases there is a growing need to improve the durability and reliability of the lithiumion batteries used in electric vehicles. the empire project investigates how welded joints in liion batteries can be improved so that the risk of catastrophic damage and fires is eliminated.
 the quality of the joints between the various components cell terminals and busbars in a lithiumion battery plays a very important role. if the welds are not of high quality many serious problems can arise. for example the joints in liion batteries are exposed to very high stresses during fast charging of electric vehicles. cracks and other defects in the joints can lead to the need for repairs and in the worst case the battery can start to burn.
 the socalled intermetals that occur during welding of joints in todays lithiumion batteries create  brittle behavior that can result in significantly reduced fatigue life and shorten product lifetime. the empire project focuses on developing lithiumion batteries with better material properties greater reliability and improved  longterm properties.
 we believe that a university can make a real difference and help change the world.  we want to do it together with those outside the walls of our university and through workintegrated learning.learn more about how we can create change together.
 information for students who are interested in a phd programme at university west
 information about phd studies
 are you an aspiring engineer looking to study in sweden? apply to our bachelor in international mechanical engineering.
 information for students from our partner universities who want to study as an exchange student at university west
 information about exchange studies
 workintegrated learning  a multifaceted learning phenomenon
 engaged employees  a crucial factor for successful companies?
 record number of international students at university west
 on our student website you will find all information about studies.
 university west is a member of the stars european university alliance.
 the study introduces the concept of commitment capital which unlike the already established term human capital indicates that it is a form of capital created in the relationship between the organization and the individual. by focusing on strengthening this capital and creating a work environment where employees feel appreciated and involved both companies and society can reap significant benefits.
 being engaged in ones work is an important health factor in organizations and engaged employees are likewise a prerequisite for successful companies. in most cases a high degree of commitment capital is therefore beneficial for the entire society. however in our study we also discuss that an excessive level of engagement which we term absolute commitment capital often requires some form of alignment and collectivism. thus there can also be risks with overengaged employees but most organizations are likely characterized by too little rather than too much engagement.
 according to the study commitment is something that develops over time  from the initial relationship to a deeper one and finally to the most developed form best described as a strong collective where shared success is more important than individual success. according to jim there are some established tools for increasing employee engagement but also significant potential for improvement.
 mere talk and policy documents rarely lead to truly engaged employees. our study illustrates that a prerequisite for employees to become extremely engaged is that owners and company leaders lead by example and make real sacrifices themselves. this should be expressed both through genuine care for employees and financially for instance through bonus systems and social activities.
 there are several insights for companies to take away from the study. here are some examples
 1. invest in attractive working conditions
 to attract the best talent companies must offer more than just a good salary. companies that invest time and resources in creating a good work environment and a healthy culture find it easier to attract and retain skilled employees.
 2. build a culture characterized by support and learning
 social activities and shared experiences can strengthen the bond between colleagues. when employees experience genuine engagement from the companys leadership they feel involved and are more likely to take responsibility for both their own and their colleagues learning which improves the companys competence.
 3. be prepared to make sacrifices
 building a culture of extreme loyalty requires sacrifices from the company as well such as having a uniform salary structure and profitsharing systems. this involves a shortterm cost but creates a strong sense of community that can lead to longterm benefits.
 the article coauthored with christian jansson at the university of skövde can be read here
 contact jim andersén professor of sustainable development focusing on industrial transformation university west jim.andersen@hv.se  46 733 123550
 engineering visions 2024 at univeristy west
 please apply through the online form below
 engineering visions 2024  a twoweek international summer school  at univeristy west in sweden
 dates august 19th  august 30th 2024 travel days not included
 this is an opportunity you dont want to miss please sign up through the form below.
 the deadline for application is may 31st.
 onlineapplication
 informationsbroschyr
 you will work in international student groups and reflect on the challenges facing our world today and create engineering visions for life on earth in 2550 years time.
 with other words you will develop engineering visions for a better world. you will also develop awareness sustainability entrepreneurship intercultural competencies for industry and society multidisciplinary and innovations.
 augsept 2023 lodz university of technology polen
 augsept 2022 glasgow caledonian university glasgow storbritannien
 augsept 2018 saxion university of applied sciences enschede nederländerna
 augsept 2016 lodz university of technology lodz polen
 janfeb 2014 saxion university of applied sciences enschede nederländerna
 take innovation to new heights  study engineering in sweden. immerse yourself in a world of cuttingedge technology creativity and problemsolving. our programmes provide you with the expertise to design solutions for a rapidly evolving world.
 ai and automation
 are you interested in the latest technologies and software  and in working within a challenging field that is constantly developing? then this masters might be for you.
 electromechanical vehicle engineering
 electric systems are becoming more and more advanced. in this masters you develop the knowledge needed to work as a highly qualified engineer in the automotive industry.
 earn a masters degree in production technology with a specialisation in welding technology. based on the iwe syllabus this programme prepares you to enter the workforce as a certified professional.
 manufacturing methods strongly affect the design quality and economy of production. this masters program incorporates recent methods new materials and new manufacturing processes.
 this masters trains you to develop smart factories automation industry robots and simulation technology. you will be keenly sought after.
 spring intake. electric systems within the automotive industry are becoming more and more advanced. develop the knowledge needed to work as a development engineer in the automotive industry.
 english level 130 language awareness and language proficiency parttime distance ens110
 the course aims at developing language proficiency and comprehension as well as the ability to analyse language structure and the position of english as a global language.
 throughout the course students are given the opportunity to practice oral proficiency and written composition. essays are also discussed in group forums for the purpose of further developing language skills. in addition students get practice in linguistic analysis through the study of grammar phonetics and phonology.
 the course is given primarily online with an asynchronous setup without scheduled meetings with the exception of one invigilated exam. it is possible to apply to take the exam at other university or learning centre. for more information on taking exams off campus click here.
 the course can be combined with other courses at the basic intermediate and advanced level in english at university west for a bachelors degree or as part of a teachers qualification or similar.
 general entry requirements and approved result from the following course english benglish 6.
 distance without gathering week 04
 distance without gathering week 36
 in this course you will study cultural phenomena and diversity from many parts of the englishspeaking world. it focuses on the study of literature and other narrative forms and offers a greater understanding of the cultural contexts in which english is used in the world today.
 from spring 2025 the course is given entirely online and has a primarily asynchronous setup with assignments and examinations being done within certain time frames rather than specific times. it can be combined with other courses at the basic intermediate and advanced level in english at university west for a bachelors degree or as part of a teachers qualification or similar.
 english level 3160 language structure and language variation parttime distance ens210
 the course deals with the structure and varieties of english. it develops the students awareness of the importance of english in todays society and shows how the english language has developed from a historical perspective in connection with how colonialism and political factors have influenced and quickened changes in the language and its geographical spread. the course also treats sociolinguistic perspectives of linguistic varieties focusing on social aspects such as gender class age ethnicity register and other social contexts. by using a selection of digital tools the students oral proficiency is practised in discussions and oral presentations.
 the course is given entirely online and has an asynchronous setup with no scheduled meetings neither on campus nor online. it can be combined with other courses at the basic intermediate and advanced level in english at university west for a bachelors degree or as part of a teachers qualification or similar.
 225 higher education credits in english 130 or equivalent.
 english level 3160 literary history and intertextuality parttime distance enl210
 in this course we explore four centuries of english history and culture through cultural narratives and connect these to contemporary stories themes and films. there is a particular focus on great britain and north america as well as on colonial and postcolonial perspectives. we also practice composing and presenting literary analyses on different themes and issues.
 staff member at school of business economics and it.
 lear corporation
 entrepreneurial finance is the provision of funding to young startups innovative growthoriented companies. this course provides a deep understanding of the whole fundraising cycle from the moment the entrepreneur conceived his idea to the moment investors exit the company. some important issues are examined in this course such as the entrepreneurs signaling to investors the various dimensions of contracting including valuation and the negotiation of a deal and the provision of corporate governance.
 entrepreneurship and innovation
 the innovation perspective at högskolan väst is broad. it is about new ways of making things useful in society whether it is a product a process a method or an organization.
 wil platforms for coproduction and utilization
 environmental work at government agencies is ultimately regulated through laws ordinances and the governments annual appropriation letter. like all other government agencies the university west is tasked with working for a better environment. the university reports annually on its work on environmental management to the swedish environmental protection agency and the extent to which set goals have been achieved.
 the overall goal of the universitys environmental management work is to reduce its negative environmental impact with a particular focus on climate biodiversity clean water and clean air.
 the areas where the universitys activities have the greatest impact on the environment have been identified in the universitys latest environmental investigation environmental investigation 2019 pdf. these are
 direct impact energy consumption business travel procurement consumption and resource utilisation waste management
 collaboration on the universitys identified environmental impact
 the environmental impact is assessed in relation to international agreements national decisions and regulations as well as the universitys own priorities. important starting points for the assessment are agenda 2030 swedens climate framework and environmental goals  and the climate framework for universities and university colleges  which university west has signed.
 environmentally friendly alternatives to hard chromium coatings
 high velocity air fuel hvaf is the newest member of the high velocity combustion spray processes and it brings significant advantages over its predecessors i.e. high velocity oxyfuel  hvof. the hvaf process operates on the same principle as hvof but the equipment is simpler. using air instead of oxygen reduces significantly the overall cost of the spraying process and allows the system to operate at lower temperatures approximately 1800 0c. newer gas supply and gun configuration result in increased spraying velocity i.e. propelling particles up to mach 3. lower thermal energy and higher kinetic energy of particles are bringing important changes in coating properties making the hvaf coatings have higher adhesion lower porosity and lower oxide content than the hvof coatings. the residual stress in hvaf coatings is lower and preponderantly in compressive state. lower temperatures in the hvaf process imply also a lower depletion ratio as well as a lower dissolution ratio of the particles during spraying. the roughness of the hvaf coatings is considerably lower making the postspray machining step unnecessary.
 at university west all students and employees should be able to thrive and feel welcome regardless of gender transgender identity or expression ethnicity religion or other belief disability sexual orientation and age.
 here you can read about university wests work with equal terms and gender equality and how you as a student or employee should proceed if you have been subjected to discrimination or harassment.
 responsibility
 read about the universitys responsibilities and role
 if you are exposed
 how to proceed
 legal framework
 read about how we work with gender mainstreaming
 internship abroad
 erasmus internship  internship in europe
 you can also receive an erasmus grant for internships within europe. however you must find a suitable internship yourself and get it approved by your institution before applying for an erasmus scholarship.
 what does erasmus internship mean?
 an erasmus internship must be at least 2 months and a maximum of 12 months.
 if you are accepted as an erasmus student you will automatically receive an erasmus grant. the grant is a contribution to be used for additional costs expenses such as travel accommodation and other costs that arise during the exchange studiesinternship. financial aid from csn remains your main source of income.
 the grant is paid out in two parts. the first part 70 of the grant is paid at the start of the term. the remaining 30 is paid after the studies are completed when the evaluationreport and the confirmation of attendance have been submitted. the student evaluation is done electronically and is mandatory for all who have participated in the erasmus mobility program.
 the amount of the grant depends on where you will study but the compensation ranges from 400 to 510 eur per month for studies 400 eur in most countries. you will then recieve an additional 150 eur per month for the internship.
 students with disabilities are entitled to extra support through the program. this does not require a separate application but it is important to notify us when you want to apply. nais approval is required.
 if the exchange studies are discontinued the erasmus grant must be repaid in full or in part following a decision by the international office.
 it is not permitted to receive sidas travel grant or other scholarships from eu or uhr for the same period in which you receive an erasmus grant. however you can apply for the erasmus grant more than once.
 how can i apply?
 you apply online. read more at  under the section important dates but you need to inform international@hv.se if you wish to apply outside the application window specified on the site. we accept applications on a rolling basis for erasmus internships that are not regulated by exchange agreements studies in the nursing program and social psychiatric care.
 the application form is open all year round and you can apply whenever  providing that you have found a placement opportunity and have received confirmation from your program manager student counselor or international coordinator that you will be able to carry it out. for those studying in the nursing program a special arrangement applies see more below.
 note we primarily communicate via email during the application process and afterward. therefore it is important that you regularly check your email especially the spam folder to ensure nothing gets stuck there.
 please note if you are studying in the nursing program you must do an erasmus internship as part of your clinical training vfu. in this case the number of places is regulated by agreements and the application deadline applies as stated below. you apply via the link above but the international office strictly adheres to the application deadlines listed below applications submitted after the deadline will not be considered.
 application for spring start  september 25
 application for autumn semester start february 15
 as part of your preparation you will establish an erasmus traineeship agreement together with your institutions coordinator. this serves as the basis for the collective insurance student ut from kammarkollegiets website which you are covered by. read more about this on kammarkollegiets website.
 you should also bring an eu card from försäkringskassa. the eu card entitles you to medically necessary healthcare benefits in euees countries and switzerland without any additional cost apart from a possible patient fee. the eu card grants you access to hospital care medical treatment dental care medications etc. provided within the public healthcare system in the country you are in. the card must always be shown when seeking medical treatment.
 download the erasmus app before your departurethe european commission has developed an app for students traveling abroad within euees. the aim is to create a platform where students can find information about the program and related tasks. the app is managed by the european commission and you can find more information here.
 website tips
 erasmus intern  companies and organizations offer internship placements for erasmus internships.
 on the swedish council of higher educations website you can find internship opportunities within europe.
 espa uk arranges internships in the united kingdom for university and collegelevel students.
 the following conditions apply to those who wish to do an internship under the erasmus program
 you must be a citizen in one of the countries participating in the erasmus program or be a permanent resident in sweden persons who have a residence permit for reasons other than studies such as immigrants with a strong connection to sweden through marriage work etc. as well as refugees.
 you must be enrolled at the institution and have completed at least one year of higher education before going abroad.
 the internship abroad must be able to be credited or otherwise recognized by your home institution.
 the internship period must be between 2.12 months.
 there must be an internship agreement between the university west the receiving companyorganization and the student.
 the company organization must be located in a country approved for internships. for more information visit the eus website.
 the grant must be applied for before the start of the internship or after the internship has begun. note that the grant cannot be awarded after the internship has ended.
 after the internship period is completed you must fill out a report. this is done online and you will receive an email with instructions once your internship is completed.
 you must apply for the internship before you graduate. this means that you can apply for the internship after completing your studies and not plan to take any more courses at university west. however no more than one term may have passed since you finished your courses. the degree application should then be submitted after completing your erasmus internship.
 for information in english see below
 relaterad information
 eric lind swedspot software engineering
 university west responds to industry needs with new software engineering masters
 eric lind senior embedded software engineer at knowit swedspot sheds light on the surging demand for skilled software developers spanning various sectors. as university west in trollhättan sweden introduces a cuttingedge masters program in software engineering with a curriculum tailored to meet the needs of industry.
 in the digital age where everything from refrigerators to cars is controlled by advanced software sweden stands at the forefront of the technological revolution.
 eric lind senior embedded software engineer at knowit swedspot has many years of experience of working within the tech and automotive industry.
 there is an enormous amount of software in modern vehicles and all car manufacturers are moving in that direction because it offers much greater flexibility. and its not just vehicles everything from household appliances to industrial systems is becoming increasingly softwaredriven he says.
 and in the center of trollhättan an epicenter for swedens automotive industry lies university west who has developed a new program to meet the growing need of talent withing the field  masters program in computer science  software engineering.
 the fact that the region has such a strong automotive industry attracts talent. this creates an environment where other areas of technology also flourish lind explains. the need for software developers is large and constant regardless of the state of the economy because digitization does not stop. we at knowit swedspot are constantly on the lookout for new talent.
 the university west education model
 aiming to train the next generation of software engineers and meet the growing need of the industry the master in computer science  software engineering applies sound engineering principles to software development providing a comprehensive understanding of the entire software development lifecycle.
 the program not only provides fundamental knowledge in software engineering but goes further by delving into key areas such as algorithms complexity management humancomputer interaction and artificial intelligence.
 eric lind who also has earlier experience from teaching and developing programs at university west still has a foot in the door with academia. i contribute with lectures and labs focused on vehicle networks and vehicle software. it gives me the opportunity to share my industry experience with students and help bridge the gap between theory and practice.
 the swedish education model which promotes independent thinking and problemsolving creates engineers equipped to meet the most challenging demands of todays technical world. this gives students a competitive advantage in the global job market.
 lind explains that students graduating from swedish and european universities are often highly sought after for their ability to think critically and solve complex problems which is crucial for success in many hightech and rapidly changing industries.
 for international students aspiring to work within the field of software development university west offers a unique opportunity to be part of an education that is not only at the forefront of technology but also shaping the future digital landscape. with a strong focus on combining theory with practice and providing students with the necessary tools to excel in todays fastpaced technical environment university west is the ultimate choice for those aiming to lead in software development.
 master in computer science  software engineering
 join our masters programme in software engineering and become a software engineer equipped with cuttingedge skills.
 eric windhede
 erik åstrand about sicomap
 my focus is mainly on xraybased methods digital xray radiography in 2d and xray computed tomography xct in 3d. in my postdoc i explore how modern artificial intelligence e.g. deep learning can be used industrially within ofp. this includes among other things questions about how an automated or semiautomated data interpretation can be performed in an industrially safe and efficient way e.g. how to handle new unknown input far from the training data but also how mathematical modeling of the inspection can be used to create added value within ofp e.g. calculation of capability and measurement uncertainty.
 the applications have a focus on additively manufactured metal products and welds. in most of my projects i collaborate with the industry.
 i teach in courses on nondestructive testing and evaluation in our nde course but also with nde parts in other manufacturing courses at the university.
 ndt nde xray computed tomography digital industrial xray artificial intelligence.
 characterization of surface asperities to understand its effect on fatigue life of electron beam powder bed fusion manufactured ti6al4 v
 karthikeyan thalavai pandian erik lindgren s. roychowdhury magnus neikter thomas hansson r. pederson
 industrial xray image analysis with deep neural networks robust to unexpected input data
 autoencoderbased anomaly detection in industrial xray images
 deeplearningbased outof distribution data detection in visual inspection images
 analysis of industrial xray computed tomography data with deep neural networks
 the library team nuteamet
 the library team system and metadata
 examinationintyg
 ethics for engineers parttime campus efi120
 this course provides the students with some basic ethical theories e.g. consequentialism deontology virtue ethics discourse ethics feminist ethics theories about justice and equal opportunities and also with decisionmaking models such as critical thinking. the students will work with case studies to analyze examples of situations that engineers might face during their professional lives and it is planned that they can have the possibility to discuss with professionally active engineers the ethical issues that they have encountered in their careers. overall in this course the students will realize that they will have an impact as future engineers on others and on sustainable development. therefore they have a responsibility for this and consequently they need to develop their critical thinking and be ready to take action.
 you also need physics 2 chemistry 1 mathematics 3c or mathematics d
 rapport  team agerarapport  team agera fulltext
 staff member at vice chancellors office division of mechanical engineering.
 development and validation of experienced workintegrated learning instrument ewil using a sample of newly graduated registered nurses  a confirmatory factor analysis
 the function of fatigue and illness perceptions as mediators between selfefficacy and healthrelated quality of life during the first year after surgery in persons treated for colorectal cancer.
 anncaroline johansson eva brink christina cliffordson malin axelsson
 selfreorientation following colorectal cancer treatment  a grounded theory study
 the singleitem measure of stress symptoms after myocardial infarction and its association with fatigue.
 psychometric analysis of the multidimensional fatigue inventory in a sample of persons treated for myocardial infarction
 illness perceptions in relation to experiences of contemporary cancer care settings among colorectal cancer survivors and their partners
 associations between fatigue symptom experiences and sleep quality after myocardial infarction
 a personality and gender perspective on adherence and healthrelated quality of life in people with asthma andor allergic rhinitis.
 fatigue after myocardial infarction  a twoyear followup study
 general selfefficacy and healthrelated quality of life after myocardial infarction
 motivational foci and asthma medication tactics directed towards a functional day
 personality traits in relation to healthrelated quality of life in persons with asthma andor allergic rhinitis
 the influence of personality traits on reported adherence to medication in individuals with chronic disease  an epidemiological study in west sweden
 disturbed sleep fatigue anxiety and depression in myocardial infarction patients
 fatigue after myocardial infarction  relationships with indices of emotional distress and sociodemographic and clinical variables
 adaptation positions and behavior among postmyocardial infarction patients
 physical activity six months after a myocardial infarction
 absence of response  a study of nurses experience of stress in the workplace
 brita olofsson claire bengtsson eva brink
 patients illness perception four months after a myocardial infarction.
 associations between depression fatigue and life orientation in myocardial infarction patients
 living with incomprehensible fatigue after recent myocardial infarction
 development of a tool for assessment of postmyocardial infarction fatigue
 symptoms illness perceptions selfefficacy and healthrelated quality of life following colorectal cancer treatment
 fatigue two months after myocardial infarction and its relationships with other concurrent symptoms sleep quality and coping strategies.
 fatigue two months after mi and its relationships with other concurrent symptoms sleep quality and coping strategies
 committed to life  adolescents and young adults experiences of living with fontan circulation
 the cardiac selfefficacy scale a useful tool to evaluate personcentred care.
 andreas fors kerstin ulin christina cliffordson inger ekman eva brink
 caring about symptoms in personcentred care
 ive lost the person i used to beexperiences of the consequences of fatigue following myocardial infarction
 considering both healthpromoting and illnessrelated factors in assessment of healthrelated quality of life after myocardial infarction
 selfefficacy and adherence as mediating factors between personality traits and healthrelated quality of life
 validation of the revised illness perception questionnaire ipqr in a sample of persons recovering from myocardial infarction  the swedish version.
 patients adherence reasoning in relation to asthma medication
 the influence of personality traits and beliefs about medicines on adherence to asthma treatment
 illness perceptions after myocardial infarction  relations to fatigue emotional distress and healthrelated quality of life
 coping with myocardial infarction  evaluation of a coping questionnaire
 charmaz kathy 2006. constructing grounded theory a practical guide through qualitative analysis. london sage
 illness perception of nursing students regarding myocardial infarction
 readjustment 5 months after a firsttime myocardial infarction  reorienting the active self.
 healthrelated quality of life in women and men one year after acute myocardial infarction
 personality adherence asthma control and healthrelated quality of life in young adult asthmatics
 illness consequences after myocardial infarction  problems with physical functioning and return to work
 dimensions of the somatic health complaints questionnaire shcq in a sample of myocardial infarction patients
 travelling and recontextualization of discourses on quality in early childhood education and care  a metaethnographic investigation
 what about becoming a professional teacher?  a study on education and experience
 quality in early childhood education and care  official policy and local practices  a metaethnographic investigation
 assessment in swedish preschool
 evaluation and implementation of sexit in student health
 the aim of the project is to evaluate the use of the sexit method as part of regular health talks at junior high and high school.
 sexit sexual health identification tool is an evidencebased method developed for youth clinics with the aim that young people who are sexually at risk or vulnerable andor young people with experience of violence should be identified and offered relevant care and support. by detecting these young people early interventions can be put in place and the development of serious illness can be prevented. in the project student health personnel from all over the country will be trained in the method and after they have conducted interviews in accordance with the method the student health personnels experiences will be collected through a questionnaire study. results from the study will form the basis for possible adaptation of the method and inform future implementation strategies. if the outcome of the evaluation indicates that sexit is a wellfunctioning method in student health additional student health personnel will be trained in the method in a second stage of the project.
 evaluation of it systems parttime campus uit010
 the course aims to create an understanding of how when and why it systems are evaluated in a development project. the course highlights various important elements in an evaluation process according to scientific literature from design science.
 vsa110organisational and systems development and
 ppb302work and project methodology or the equivalent.
 the objective of the evastir project is to support the swedish automotive industry with the production zeroemission vehicles using sustainable manufacturing processes. this project will develop a sustainable joining solution friction stir welding to support design and fabrication a costeffective scalable lightweight and crashresistant battery tray for electric vehicles. the specific technical objectives of this project are to develop friction stir welding procedures for dissimilar material joints of cast and extruded aluminium alloys and for high speed welding to 5mmin. the project aims to strengthen the swedish competitiveness in the electric vehicle industry and the successful completion of this project would enable a full swedish supply chain through oem subcontractor raw materials supplier and manufacturing equipment supplier. the project results are expected to be implemented in swedish electric vehicle production within 1 to 3 years after completion of the project.
 hydro extruded solutions
 evasyscourse evaluations closed due to upgrade
 the evasys system is closed on 126 due to upgrading to a new version. among other things a new simplified login and a simplified user interface are being introduced.during the day 126 it is not possible to answer course evaluationssurveys or to work in the system.
 event attracted 100 students and tech company representatives
 your future career day 2022 a pilot project aiming to bring technology companies and engineering students together attracted over 100 participants to the innovatum district last week. now there are plans to let the event grow until next year.
 last week the your future career day event took place at the innovatum district. a pilot project where engineering students at university west got the opportunity to meet technology companies in trollhättan  afry combitech gkn aerospace and tengineering. companies that are in constant need of new employees with the right skills.
 the event was a concrete way to connect students and companies says mattias ottosson development engineer at university west. many students took the opportunity to talk to the company representatives discuss possible career paths traineeships and degree projects. there was a great buzz at the venue.
 many of those who study at masters level at university west are international students who have come to trollhättan from all parts of the world. to reach them the entire event was held in english.
 skill supply is an important issue for tech companies and the city therefore it is important that as many students as possible want to establish themselves in trollhättan after their studies. so in addition to the technology companies the property company kraftstaden the swedish public employment service in trollhättan and the city of trollhättan were also present during your career day. to talk about trollhättan as a place to live and work. in particular attractive accommodation and the proximity to both work and nature was highlighted.
 the response has been positive
 both students and companies have expressed that it was a very interesting day where many contacts were made says mattias ottosson. hopefully the students now feel more excited and motivated and that they know better what their future work life might entail.
 your future career day was organized by university west the swedish public employment service in trollhättan afry combitech gkn aerospace kraftstaden tengineering and the city of trollhättan. the parties will now evaluate the pilot project.
 mattias ottosson says that he is very satisfied with the event and that the students have expressed that they would like to see more similar activities in the future as well.
 he concludes by saying that there are many more companies that want to participate and meet the universitys students. although this year the event was conducted with a limited number of companies there are hopes to grow it next time.
 at university west we arrange conferences events and meetings together with our important collaboration partners.
 university wests  core values  generous inclusive proactive and crazy enough  are what defines us and describes who we are. this goes for all the events and conferences at the university as well. we by our selves or with collaboration partners arrange both small and bigger events and conferences. on these pages you can explore and learn more about our events if you have any questions or want to get in contact please do so at event@hv.se
 there are several annual ceremonies held at university west.to learn more about them click here
 university west both host and produce several conferences annualy. our venues at campus makes it possible for us to arrange smaller and more intmate meetings as well as large scale productions with many delegates.
 whats going on?
 all you need to know about your exam at university west.
 in the tabs below you can read about what applies to the centrally administered invigilated exams at university west. various forms of examinations such as written exams in an exam hall digital exams and assignments may be conducted during your study period.
 more information about other forms of examination rules and guidelines at university west can be found here.
 exam schedule
 the exam dates is usually in the schedule at the start of the course otherwise it will be published no later than five weeks prior to the exam. you can also find all published exams here.
 in connection to all the courses an ordinary exam and a reexam are offered. in some cases an extra reexam is also offered the week before the semester starts in august. if you wish to take a reexam in addition to these occasions you are welcome to register for the exam the next time the course is given. the exam will then be in accordance with the course plan applicable for the course occasion.
 the exam date is published in the course schedule no later than five weeks prior to exam date so check your course schedule.
 inspera assessment is a system used at university west for digital oncampus exams. this means that you will write your exam on a computer in an exam hall instead of using paper. a computer and accessories will be provided at your assigned seat so you do not need to bring your own computer.
 on this page you will find information that will help you to prepare for an exam in inspera.
 preparations prior to the exam
 you register for the exam in ladok for students when the registration period is open. the registration period is open from 25 to 8 days prior to the exam. to register for an exam you must be enrolled on the course.
 the exams in inspera are anonymous and the anonymous code is generated when you register for the exam. when you log in to inspera you will see your name this is needed for the invigilator to verify your identity. grading is conducted anonymously.
 you will need your username and password for your student account. it is important that you verify that you can log in to inspera prior to the exam.
 if you have forgotten your password you can reset it in my account.
 a demo exam is available here so you can prepare yourself for the exam.
 inspera supports the latest versions of web browsers such as chrome firefox ms edge and safari. if you encounter any issues with the demo exam change to a different browser.
 on the exam day
 you must be able to identify yourself so you need to bring a valid photoid such as an id card drivers license or a passport. it must be visible throughout the entire exam.
 personal belongings during the exam
 you are not allowed to bring your personal belongings mobile phone wearable technology or watches to the exam hall. there will be lockers outside the hall where you can keep your personal belongings. you need to bring a padlock if you want to lock it.
 get to the exam early on the day of the exam you should be present 15 minutes before the exam starts so you can identify yourself to the invigilator and find your assigned seat. you also need to prepare for any necessary aid for the specific exam as well as log in to inspera. once you have logged in you will see the exams you are registered for as activated under the tab my tests.
 five minutes prior to the exam begins the invigilator will provide brief information.
 a second entry to the exam hall is possible 30 minutes after starting. you are not allowed to leave the exam hall until 40 minutes after the start of the exam.
 if the exam is opened in safe exam browser seb you will receive a password from the invigilator and information that you can begin. using seb means that your computer will be locked down and you will only have access to inspera and aid specified by the teacher.
 when you are logged in click on  click here to get ready for the exam you are about to take. if you have several exams to take verify the date and time to ensure that you select the correct exam. when the exam starts the option open exam is activated click and open the exam.
 if you finish early click on submit now and the invigilator will be notified in inspera that you have submitted your exam wait for the invigilator to verify your id. the invigilator will also let you know that you can log out of the computer.
 rules in the exam hall
 at each assigned seat there will be instructions on how the exam is conducted and what applies. the invigilator in the exam hall is always available and can help with answering your questions.
 your id must be placed so it is visible throughout the entire exam
 any specified aids are to be visible throughout the entire exam
 the only paper that is permitted to use is provided by university west
 personal belongings such as mobile phones wearable technology or watches are stored in lockers outside the exam hall
 you are allowed to leave the exam hall to visit the restroom. there will be a designated list where you write your name course code and time. when you return to the exam hall you write down the time again to indicate when you returned to your seat
 light refreshments are allowed and should be placed visibly throughout the exam
 keep in mind that there might be students who are sensitive to perfumes as well as nuts
 if you have any questions the invigilator can help with answering your questions.
 compulsory registration applies to all sitin exams both regular and resits. the registration period is open from 25 to 8 days before the exam this includes weekends and holidays.
 the application link for the exam can be found either under the heading current or under the heading uncomplete depending on whether the courses study period has passed. click on the link tick the box for the current exam and click the apply button. you will receive a confirmation when your application has been made.
 please note that if no student has signed up for the exam when the registration period has ended then the examination will be cancelled. if this were to happen then there wont be another opportunity until the next time the course has an examination.
 is the exam for a course that is being discontinued and this was the last opportunity to take the exam then please contact the responsible teacher.
 if you cant register for the exam
 the registration is open from 25 to 8 days before the exam. if you still cant register during this period  you find the form here.
 if you havent registered for a sitin exam your possibilities to take the exam is subject to availability. late registration must be done on the day of the examination.
 0730  830 am for the morning exam on weekdays
 100  200 pm for the afternoon exam on weekdays
 0815  915 am for the exam on saturdays
 you register at the window by the exam office in building b second floor opposite of gregarts student bookstore where you sign up for the late registration list. please note that a student registered for the exam has the right to arrive 30 minutes after the start of the exam and it is not until after that the availible places can be distributed to the students who has made a late registration.
 anonymous exam
 when you sign up for a sitin exam in ladok you receive an anonymous code that replaces your name and social security number. on the day of the exam you sign an attendance list containing your anonymous code your name and your social security number. this list is not available to the teachers until the examiner is to certify the grade so you are anonymous until then.
 if you sign up for a late registration your exam is not anonymous so remember to register for the exam no later than eight days prior to exam date.
 if you have a valid naiscertificate the following applies
 a digital examination is all types of examinations that are done via canvas for example a quiz analytic questions programming athome written exam etc.
 to inquire about the possibilities to get an adjusted digital examination contact the responsible teacherexaminor at the start of the course or at least 8 days prior to the exam to inform them that you have a naiscertificate.
 when you contact the examinor you should
 state your need for adjustment
 note which exam it refers to course code
 the date for the examination
 it is always the examinator who decides whether it is possible to make an adjustment on the exam or not. the examinor will get back to you with a decision no later than five days before the exam.
 oncampus written exam
 oncampus written exam refer to all the exams and tests that take place in our premises on campus.
 in order to get adjustment on an oncampus written exam you sign up for the exam via ladok. the registration is open 258 days before the exam. you should also send in a registration for an adjustment exam to tentamensanpassning@hv.se at least 8 days prior to the exam.
 you as a student are responsible to apply for adjustment on each exam in order to receive the support your are recommended and wish to have.
 you have to apply for adjustment no later than 8 days before the exam by sending an email to tentamensanpassning@hv.se with following information
 date and time of the exam
 examinerresponsible teacher
 specify your adjustment on the current exam
 note you must also register to the exam in ladok for students
 find more information about pedagogical support here
 exams off campus
 learning centre
 if you study through a learning center you will receive information from that learning center about exam registration and routines.
 students with special reasons can get the opportunity to take an exam at another institution or another learning centre than the one where the student is studying. its the examninor who determines if special reasons are conciderd to exist. in that case the examination is carried out at the same time as it is scheduled at university west. it is your responsibility as a student to find an appropriate venue an invigilator and a place for taking the exam within a resonable time before the exam. note that the venue and invigilator has to be approved by the examinor.
 you can choose to take the exam in another location for the following courses english level 130
 language awareness and language proficiency 15 credits ens110
 for more information see exams off campus.
 rules in the exam room
 you must be in place 15 minutes before the start of the exam. five minutes before the exam the exam host go through information and rules for the exam. entrance to the exam takes place up to 30 minutes after the start of the exam. you are not allowed to leave the exam room until 40 minutes after the start of the exam.
 you will recieve your personal cover sheet with the following information
 carefully read the information on the front cover of the exam. it contains information about course code course name time for the exam and what study aids that are allowed.
 when you take an exam at university west you must bring your passport for identification. it should be placed in a visible position on your desk and should remain there throughout the duration of the examination.
 the course examiner or the teacher responsible for the course will announce whether any study aids are allowed and if so what sort. this information will be provided in writing on the front of the examination script read this carefully. the only paper that is permitted is that provided by the university. you may also bring light refreshments. jackets bags etc must be left in the area that is specially provided. your phone must be off and placed in a bag or in your jacket.
 the only accepted reason for leaving the examination room is to go to the toilet. visits to the toilet are registered by noting on a special list.
 all suspicions of academic dishonestyduring an examination will be reported.
 the invigilator will announce when only 15 minutes of examination time remain. prior to submitting your exam paper you need to make sure that
 name and personal number have been written on all of the answer sheets
 that all of the sheets of your answer are numbered
 that the questions that you have answered have all been marked on the examination cover.
 also make sure that the examination cover sheet has been completed.
 all of the above information should be written on the exam paper before the end of the examination.
 you are not allowed to leave the examination room until 40 minutes after the start of the exam. you are not allowed to take the examination papers with you until the examination has ended.
 it should be quiet in the exam room. the exam host have the right to dismiss a student who interferes or obstruct the exam.
 available teacher
 the responsible teacher should be available for any questions during the first two hours of the exam period. this can be done either by having the teacher come to the exam room or reachable by phone.
 in the event of a fire alarm all material must be left at the desk. all students and hosts must leave the room and go to the designated place in accordance with current evacuation rules. the examination time is extended by the corresponding time that the break has taken place. if the interruption is longer than 30 minutes the examiner should be asked if the examination opportunity is to be extended or if a new opportunity is to be offered. total silence should prevail during the interruption.
 your graded exam
 you should be notified of the results of an exam within 15 working days unless otherwise is stated.
 your graded exam will be scanned and published on my exams. for more information about scanning of exams can be found here.
 for an exam in inspera you can view your answers and any comments from the teacher once your exam has been graded. log in to inspera and go to the tab archive to review your exam.
 i study at another university can i write my exam at university west?
 no unfortunately not students from other institutions are not allowed to take exams at university west. reach out to an adult education or alternetivley a learning centre in a nearby municipality to see if there is possible to write the exam there.
 can i write two exams at the same time?
 you can write two exams on the same day  one in the morning and one in the afternoon. you are not allowed to write two exams at the same time.
 in which room do i write my exam?
 the room that applies for your exam is displayed at a digital screen at the kc corner in the corridor between service center and the entrance to the hcorridor on floor 1 and at the student café in the bbuilding.. your seat is announced at the room.
 practice on old exams
 to the exam archive
 request for exam answers
 to the request form
 hälsopromotion med inriktning mot arbetsintegrerat lärandehealth promotion with specialization in work integrated learning mag f
 informatik med inriktning mot arbetsintegrerat lärandeinformatics with specialization in work integrated learning mag mas f
 pedagogik med inriktning mot arbetsintegrerat lärande education with specialization in work integrated learning mag mas f
 produktionsteknikproduction technology mas t
 socialt arbete med inriktning mot arbetsintegrerat lärande social work with specialization in work integrated learning mag mas f
 socialt arbete och socialpedagogik social work and social pedadogy kand f
 sociologi med inriktning mot arbetsintegrerat lärandesociologi with specialization in work integrated learning mag f
 vårdvetenskap med inriktning mot arbetsintegrerat lärandecaring sciences with specialization in work integrated learning mag mas f
 produktionsteknikproduction technology  licentiatexamen och doktorsexamen
 perkins m. furze l. roe j.  macvaugh j. 2023. navigating the generative ai eraintroducing the ai assessment scale for ethical genai assessment supplementary material. arxiv preprint.
 perkins m. furze l. roe j.  macvaugh j. 2024. the artificial intelligence assessment scale aias a framework for ethical integration of generative ai in educational assessment. journal of university teaching and learning practice 216.
 laboration
 omexamination
 exams off campus  off campus
 exams off campus  specific courses
 starting autumn 2024 you have the opportunity to take the exam in another location for the distance courses literature and culture 15 credits enl110 and language awareness and language proficiency 15 credits ens110.
 you also have the option to take the exam within two days before the regular exam date. it will then be a different version of the same exam.
 on this page you find all information that you need on how to apply for taking an exam in another location.
 contact the university or study center where you wish to take your exam and provide them with date and time for the exam to confirm that they can accommodate you.
 you provide the accomodator the following contact information about university west
 study administration
 exam coordination
 basic requirement is invigilation and that only approved study aids will be used during the exam.
 if you are entitled to study support during studies nais you are responsible to verify with the accomodator if they can accommodate it during the exam.
 the following  information is mailed to the examination coordinator at university west on email address tentamen@hv.se together with the information that you want to take the exam in another location
 your first and last name
 personal security number yyyymmddxxxx
 name of accomodator
 name of the contact person for the accomodator
 emailaddress to the contact person for the accomodator
 phone number to the contact person for the accomodator
 the request for taking an exam with the accomodator has to be done before registering for the exam in ladok for students.
 applying to university west for an exam in another location has to be done no later than two weeks before the exam date.
 the student is responsible for any costs that might arise with an exam in another location.
 higher education institutions swedish authorities and local study centers
 the church of sweden swedish embassies and international swedish schools that are approved as accomodator
 we only approve study centers that are part of the nitus network.
 university west will contact the accomodator and arrange for the examination thesis to be sent to them. this will be sent a few days before the exam date.
 if you are unable to attend the exam you need to cancel the arrangement with the accomodator and unregister for the exam in ladok for students.
 the accomodator will  send your written exam to the examination coordination at university west after the exam.
 keep in mind to start as early as possible since the process might take some time
 exchange studies at school of business economics and it
 business administration international strategic management organisation and leadership
 economic geography statistics itinformatics political science
 there are no tuition fees in sweden for exchange students from partner universities.
 exchange with ethiopia to promote inclusive teacher education
 dr teshome tola dr ambissa boru kenea and dr abdulaziz hussein mamie together with the host kerstin von brömssen.
 theory and practice really work together here. it is a big difference compared to ethiopia. even though vfu placement is available here there is not the same integration as here says dr. ambissa kenea boru from the college of education and behavioral studies at addis ababa university.
 in ethiopia school is not compulsory to begin with. in addition 80 percent of the schools are located in rural areas with poorer material conditions. there are larger classes and fewer teachers per student just to name a few differences.
 they continue
 ethiopia has great difficulty in recruiting teachers and due to the poor conditions of the schools many teachers leave their profession. we need to strengthen the teaching profession and make them worth something.
 it is particularly tough for the girls they say. they are not allowed to decide over themselves in the same way as the boys but the parents rule and as many are farmers they want the girls to remain at home on the farm. there are also many girls who are allowed to marry early.
 in elementary and middle school there are relatively many girls in school but then it decreases more and more. it is a big concern.
 as an example they mention that they themselves only have one female colleague at their own university.
 promote diversity in education
 she continues
 in almost all classrooms in sweden today there are children from many different countries and future teachers must be able to relate to and understand different students backgrounds and have knowledge of different educational systems in the world.
 good education for all
 kerstin points to the connection to the uns sustainability goal number 4 good education for all where it says that high quality in education is the basis for creating sustainable development.
 about the project
 the aim of this project is to promote internationalisation through academic collaboration in the field of education and teacher education with the aim of exploring and challenging policy and practice concerning issues of diversity interculturality and intercultural competences or intercultural sensitivity.
 the concept involves dimensions of culture and religion language ethnicity motoric and social and cognitive behaviour in education. these are used at all levels of education. intercultural competences can be understood as necessary in order to reach an inclusive education with quality which is underlined by un and unesco. according to unesco inclusive education is seen as a process of addressing and responding to the diversity of needs of all learners through increasing participation in learning cultures and communities and reducing exclusion from education and from within education.
 inclusive education means different and diverse students learning side by side in the same school and in the same classroom. inclusive education values diversity and the unique contributions each student brings to the classroom. in an inclusive setting every child should feel safe and has a sense of belonging. and school staff have the training support flexibility and resources to nurture encourage and respond to the needs of all students. these matters are addressed in our joint work on diversity in education and teacher education.
 to study issues of diversity and intercultural competences and how these are articulated negotiated studied and handled in policy and practice in both curricula in compulsory education in schools as well as in teacher education in respective university departments of teacher education.
 to examine what kind of dilemmas of diversity and interculturalityintercultural competences in policy and practice in education that could become integrated as teaching content and used for teaching strategies in teacher education at both teacher education departments.
 webbpublicering
 exploration of hiring discrimination
 this project investigates the mechanisms and processes of ethnic and racial discrimination in hiring through examining employment decisions using eyetracking in combination with dialogue and survey in an experimental setting.
 the expected results of this project are highly relevant in swedish society today inorder to identify the practice and mechanisms of labor market discrimination specifically the process of how unconscious and conscious choices are made when recruiting.
 the competence development initiative exsus2 aims to support companies to meet the rapid technological and societal development required to address the challenges facing society.
 nordholms industriinstallationer ab
 parker hannifin manufacturing sweden ab
 extended demo period for feedbackfruits until august 2024
 since last fall högskolan väst has been testing the feedback tool feedbackfruits and the demo period has now been extended until august 2024. this means that courses in study periods 3 and 4 also have the opportunity to try it out. feedbackfruits is integrated into canvas and offers various features. the ones we have primarily explored so far are interactive documents and interactive videos. next year we will also test peer review and the comprehension feature.
 if you want to learn more about feedbackfruits there is a brief overview video available here.
 on january 10th ict educators caroline anderson and bitte sjöholm will have a session with educators from feedbackfruits
 830915 caroline and bitte will cover interactive documents and interactive videos. swedish speaking
 9301030 eva from feedbackfruits swedishnorwegianspeaking will cover peer review comprehension and answer questions.
 the meeting will be in a hybrid format allowing participation on campus or online. if you are interested please register at akademus@hv.se and specify whether you will attend on campus or online. if you also want to try any of the tools in a course during the spring talk to bitte or caroline after the meeting or contact akademus@hv.se.
 very welcome
 if you would like a presentation of feedbackfruits in english please contact akademus@hv.se.
 ptv was also externally audited in connection with the startup of högskolan västs kk environment primus arc18.
 for results please see this page in swedish.
 extra it service window tonight 16.30  23.00
 due to a serious security risk in windows it needs to update all windows servers as soon as possible the work will be carried out during the evening and may involve short operational disruptions.
 how to get my graded exam
 information on how you find your graded exams
 scanning of exams
 we scan all graded exams at university west sometimes even other kinds of written examinations. you as a student will find your exams at hv.se  student  my exams. the exams are available in pdfformat.
 direct link to my exams
 note that it may take up to three working days from the day that the examiner leave the exam in order for it to get scanned until you will see it at my exams.
 your exams are left on the universitys server for two years after the day it was graded then they are deleted. save your exams on your own computer if you want to be sure to keep them. the paper exam is saved for about a month after it has been graded. if you discover any errors in your scanned exam such as missing a page it is important that you contact service center as soon as possible. please enter your personal identification number course code and examination date for faster handling. you can not collect your exam in paper format.
 the cover sheet
 in order for the scan to work a special cover sheet is required for the exam. this cover sheet contains some preprinted information but some information should be filled in by you as a student. the invigilator will inform you what information to fill in when taking the exam. in order for the system to identify each individual exam it is important that  you do not write outside of specified fields or on the qr code. it is also important that you write clearly since the exams are machine read.
 fablight  modeling of sustainable am processes for the fabrication of lightweight products
 the project contributes to technology maturity of manufacturing method and components for fossilfree propulsion and energy supply through improved and validated predictive ability in modeling lpbf laser powder bed fusion of titanium to enable manufacturing of large complex components with high quality.
 manufacturing large complex gas turbine components using lpbf is challenging with regard to material structure and defects during the build stage and subsequent heat treatment e.g. build stop delamination against support structure cracking at thickness transitions and geometry deformations. the project will identify the right model complexity by developing calibrating and apply material and fe models suitable for thermomechanically coupled analysis that can predict with sufficient accuracy the fabrication. a  utlysning inom sip lighter  combination of several analysis tools linked to before during and after manufacturing will be used 1 numerical simulations 2 insitu monitoring 3 validating experiments after manufacturing. potential and competitiveness for weight reduction increases as an effect of the project through reduced development time greater design freedom with the help of optimization and improved quality and reduced material waste compared to casting or forging.
 validated analysis tools and methods from the project are necessary to move forward with circular material flow netzero material and energy consumption and sustainable circular material evaluation and demonstration of new variants of manufacturing process chains for products and expertise on effective methods for am process chain simulation helps to reduce expensive trialanderror attempts throughout the supply chain.
 facilities on campus
 the university has a number of facilities available to students. below you can read more about these and our references to the premises generally be managed and used for both students and employees to thrive.
 take your own food with you?
 if you have your own food there is canteen with microwave ovens and refrigerators in our two studentpentrys.
 you can also sit and eat your own food in the restaurang västan och centralcaféet. microwave ovens are also available at the centracaféet in the c building.
 silent room  a place of stillness
 the room is on the third floor at the far north of the large building f318.the room is for students and employees and is not connected to religious practice other than that which takes place within the visitor. this silent room should be a quiet place to rest meditate pray or simply take a break. the universitys andrum must work for people with different backgrounds genders and beliefs.
 no personal items may be left in the room.for more information about the university church arrangement in the silent room.
 relaxation rooms
 the relaxation room can be found in h107 and may be used for 1 hour. pass cards can be borrowed from the servicecenter.
 ventilation is switched off between 16300700 on weekdays and completely turned off on weekends. ventilation can be adjusted manually lasts 2 hours by pressing the ventilation button on the corridor.
 recycling
 waste recycling is applied in the university premises.fractions of plastic metal glass cans recycling glass and pet bottles is located in the kitchen and all public areas.batteries and light bulbs you leave the reception.
 read more in sorting wizard or you can also download a sorteringsapp.
 smoking is prohibited on the premises and allowed only eight meters from the entrance doors.
 printing and copying
 faq  copying and printing
 frequently asked questions about copying and printing.
 for how long can i access my printouts at the printer?your printouts remain in the system for up to 12 hours after you click print on the computer.
 can i fax from the printers?no.
 why cant i scan to an email address other than my own hv.se address?this is to minimize scanned documents being sent to wrong mail address. if you have a lot to scan select scan to folder.
 faq for new students
 as a new student you probably have some questions. here you will find answers to the most common questions as a new student.
 how does it work with parking?
 you get a parking permit by registering your mobile number on my account.please note that the permit takes effect at 0800 next weekday. also keep in mind that you need to pay a parking fee. instructions are signposted in the parking lot.
 if all parking spaces are occupied you can park for free at the slättbergshallen ice stadium link to google map.
 westcard
 what is the west card?
 do you need access to campus on evenings and weekends? are you going to open a booked group room or borrow books from our library? you who study on campus in trollhättan need a west card that you use as a pass card and library card. it also works as a print and copy card.
 the west card is personal and you can pick it up at any time during the semester in our service center after you have registered for your education and created a student account.
 the authorization on the card applies to all group rooms and public computer rooms. the card is activated by holding the card in front of the card reader entering the code and then holding up the card again. activation is valid for 12 hours. stations with card readers are located in several places on campus.
 you can pick up the west card with identification in the service center.  read more about the west card.
 what is my pin for the west card?
 when you as a new student created an account you chose a fourdigit code. this code applies to the west card. if you have forgotten your code this can be changed on my account and confirmed with your university password.
 how do i find the schedule?
 you can find the schedule in canvas. you can view individual schedules for a course by pressing schedule in the selected course. by tapping calendar in the canvas app or on the web you will see all the schedules you have summarized. you can adjust which calendars should be visible. more information about canvas.
 practical information about campus
 when can i be in the house?
 the opening hours are 0700  23.00 by the west card. the doors to the main entrance and framgången at restaurang västan have the same opening hours as the library.
 there are 32 group rooms on campus that students can book for individual and group work. you can book these through schema.hv.se remember to log in to access the group rooms.
 how do i find the premises?
 letters describe where the room is in the building and number which floor. the first digit 2 for example that it is floor 2. eg. f203 house f floor 2 floor 3.
 where is gregarts student bookstore?
 d205 go towards entrance ail go up the spiral staircase to floor 2. gregarts is then just to the left. here is literature for courses as well as used literature.
 where can i eat?
 for your own food there are various student kitchenettes equipped with microwaves and refrigerators. these are located on floors 2 and 4 in the i  j houses. restaurant västan and the central café serve lunch etc. read more at facilities on campus.
 are there lockers i can borrow?
 yes but the sooner you sign up the greater the chance of getting a locker. you need to bring your own padlock. gregarts bookstore sells padlocks. the lockers are emptied in the summer. they are located on floors 234 in g h i j and in the bhouse on the ground floor.
 studyrelated issues
 what is canvas?
 canvas is a digital learning platform that deals with everything needed for a course. bibliography course pm assignments and schedule. good to have a habit of often checking canvas to stay up to date. more information about canvas and login.
 remember not to print the schedule as it can be changed which room the lecture will be in.
 when do i have the exam?
 you will see the date for the exam in your schedule at the start of the course. registration is made via ladok for students. when your exam is corrected it is scanned and you can then see it under my exams.
 how does it work to print?
 the west card is used to print and copy.when printing select hvprint on the computer when printing then go to any printer in the building and hold your west card over the card reader. then follow the instructions.when copying hold your west card over the card reader follow the instructions.
 if i as a student have special needs for example a disability where do i turn?
 read more and find contact information on the page study with disabilities.
 do i need to have all the books?
 contact the person who is responsible for the course.
 i forgot my password what do i do?
 go to hv.sestudent and select my account among student tools or go directly to mittkonto.hv.se. then click on can not log in and follow the instructions.
 login is via office 365 which you can find under tools on the student web. to log in to office 365 use your username followed by @ student.hv.se.
 this can look like this buba0001@student.hv.se. in the password field enter your password as usual.
 how do i access wireless internet on campus?
 as a student you should use wifi eduroam. eduroam stand is available at the service center. installation guides are available at hv.seguides. your phone and computer automatically connect to eduroam once you have installed it. read more under wifi eduroam.
 university west does not require or recommend any particular specifications regarding private computers for use in teaching. however specific courses may have recommendations.   keep in mind that different computer models have different operating systems with varying characteristics. for example it does not work to install office365 apps with full functionality on a chromebook for this you need a computer with windows or macosx.
 this is how you get started with your studies.
 faq for international students
 study on distance
 tips and support it tools etc.
 support and service for distance learning
 frequently asked questions about onedrive.
 if i share documents with someone else what if we both work in it at the same time?working in the same document is no problem. the documents are saved automatically and continuously and there is no save button. onedrive has full multiuser support. you can see each others cursors and at the right of the status bar you can see who is working in the document.
 are the files being backed up?there is no way for the service  it department to back up files in onedrive. if a document is missing you may find it in the onedrive recycle bin. you will find the recycle bin to the left of the files and folders list in onedrive. you have to handle the recycle bin by yourself. the recycle bin is automatically emptied after 90 days.
 faster computer simulation of sheet metal pressing
 fatigue strength improvement of welded high strength steels towards lightweight design fatlw
 the aim of the present project is to in a critical manner study the two improvement techniques in order to increase understanding of the factors that control fatigue life of welded high strength steels and to help industry in selecting the most optimal procedure. to achieve this cruciform welded samples will be produced using ltt and conventional welding consumables in 1100 mpa and 1300 mpa yield strength steels with a plate thickness of 15 mm. some of the welded samples will then be hfmi treated. residual stresses in aswelded condition and after application of hfmi will be evaluated using xray diffraction. fatigue testing under constant and variable amplitude loading will be performed under stress ratio of 0.5. it is expected that the results will have a large interest among manufactures of equipment subjected to fatigue loading. for example volvo trucks and volvo construction equipment manufacturing many types of heavy vehicles can see some significant advantages of increasing the strength of the steel in their vehicles since this could save weight and thus increase the payload. the results will be very interesting and useful to welding consumable producing companies as fatigue is a concern when dealing with welded hss. the results of the investigations will also be important for the future use of high strength steels. the possibility to use hss more than today is a significant step towards saving energy and a more sustainable future. the project aims is in line with 17 goals for a better world by 2030 where the goals have the power to end poverty and stop climate change.
 project deliverables the industrial deliverables and anticipated outcomes of this project are
 solid results as a basis for communication with customers
 a fundamental understanding of how fatigue life can be improved for high strength steels
 possibility to use higher strength steels and consumables for fatigue loaded structures
 development of a reliable database for selecting suitable improvement methods
 possibilities to select the method giving best results to lowest cost
 a solid background for selecting a relevant implementation strategy
 the course will cover aspects of fatigue failure for metallic engineering materials. this will include the basic mechanisms of fatigue the factors that influence fatigue generation of material data related to fatigue and fatigue life assessment methods. both the classical approach and the fracture mechanics approach for fatigue life assessment will be introduced. at the end of the course a student is expected to be able to explain the important aspects of fatigue in engineering metals and perform a simple fatigue life assessment.
 bachelor of science degree in materials science and engineering mechanical engineering
 chemical engineering manufacturing engineering production technology or equivalent. in
 addition at least 7.5 he credits in materials science at least 15 he credits in mathematics
 and english benglish 6 or equivalent are required.
 feast  weld feasibility heat treatment studies of new superalloys
 superalloys are materials with unique characteristics not at least with regard to its superb temperature capability and strength in relation to ordinary materials such as stainless steel. two new superalloys g27 and vdm780 will investigated in terms of welding and associated heat treatments  within the feast weld feasibility heat treatment studies of new superalloys project. the main purpose of the project which is run by university west gkn aerospace and brogren industries is to disclose the process ability and in particular the weldability and associated heat treatments of g27 and vdm 780 in relation to the standard grade alloy 718 and waspaloy.
 feast2  weld feasibility heat treatment studies of new superalloys part 2
 university of manitoba
 feedback control advanced course parttime campus rtf600
 the technical content of the course covered through lectures exercises and laboratory work includes the control design process signal size gain stability sensitivity robustness the smallgain theorem transfer function matrices disturbance models in the time domain and frequency domain frequencydomain specifications fundamental limitations and tradeoffs controller structures and internal model control linearquadratic optimization of state feedback and kalman filter synthesis using convex optimization. the course also covers gain schedulingparamterestyrning the mit rule and adaptive reference regulation mrac.
 mfa600mechatronics for automation and
 srt700systems and control and
 feedback control engineering parttime campus rlt200
 dfr100differential equations for control engineering or the equivalent.
 feedbackfruits
 female immigrant students pathways to graduation in higher education a study about equality and integration in society
 feminist foreign policy and the battle for civil society in europe
 the aim of this study is to examine the relations between foreign policy and civil society actors centering on diplomatic attempts to intervene in civil societies abroad to strengthen certain organizations and to change thehearts and minds of citizens of other countries  and also on civil society efforts to reach out to foreign diplomats for support.
 we intervene in a growing yet underdeveloped literature that acknowledges theimportance of transnational links between state officials diplomats and civil society. to study these links we focus on the contentious issue of gender in europe. more specifically we center on the swedish feminist foreign policy as pursued and contextualized with respect to the civil societies of poland and hungary where gender equality is highly contested. using a relational perspective with focus on the interaction between diplomats and civil society actors our questions center on both the concrete network relations and the discursive interactions and adaptations as the ffp is negotiated and interpreted in the local context
 what is the character of the networks between swedish diplomats and polish and hungarian civil society actors?
 how is the ffp framed and discursively adapted?
 to answer these questions we use a combination of network analyses and discourse analyses based on interviews with diplomats and civil society actors in poland and hungary public talks written policies and public diplomacy texts.
 ann towns göteborgs universitet projektledareiver neumann london school of economics and political science
 fiber scanner for automated textile sorting of the future
 a new fiber scanner has been inaugurated at wargön innovation. it is an important part of the nordic regions only test and demo facility for automatic sorting of textile flows which sorts for both reuse redesign and recycling. university west is one of several actors that participated in the initiative.
 the textile and fashion industry are facing a major paradigm shift. new legal requirements are expected in 2024 which means that sweden will collect three times more textiles and clothing than today which in turn requires that the sorting capacity needs to be significantly increased. this means among other things that new technologies for automated textile sorting need to be developed.
 wargön innovation drives this progress by developing technical solutions together with several partners. solutions that enable efficient and sustainable textile flows. this is required for sweden to be able to take care of large quantities of textiles in the future through reuse redesign and recycling of materials.
 working together with technical solutions for sorting textiles is both interesting and important from a sustainability perspective. through a type of fiber you can create new material flows that can be included in new business models. the equipment provides completely new possibilities for sorting and recycling.
 the textile sorting equipment is built within the project wargotex development and has been financed by resource and by swedens textile and fashion company teko and university west.
 more about wargön innovation
 contact linn gustavsson university westemail linn.gustavsson@hv.sephone 4670946 26 54
 field stoves for ukraine are welded at university west
 the idea to manufacture field stoves for ukraine appeared when the väderstad company spread its drawings of a simple model via the internet. the construction is robust and can be used both as a heat source and as a stove.
 the stove is very easy to manufacture. it takes barely half an hour to weld all the parts together. but we are several actors who make this possible says stefan björklund development engineer at högskolan väst.
 brålanda industri is sponsoring the first 32 stoves with lasercut parts in black sheet metal and the machine shop axel starck is donating nuts and screws. materials for another 30 or so stoves are sponsored by gkn aerospace materials says stefan.
 heat source and stove
 the stoves are fired with wood and the heat can be easily regulated via a damper if you want to cook. an ingenious construction on the chimney makes it possible to cook coffee or food even on top of the chimney.
 so far 32 field stoves have been welded another 32 will be manufactured shortly and in the next step about 30 more will be welded. but there could be even more.
 if more actors get in touch and want to sponsor with additional material we are happy to stand up and weld says björn särnerblom.
 in addition its possible to fill the stoves with various necessities for example flashlights power banks batteries candy food first aid or other things that may come in handy. just contact us if you want to contribute says björn.
 this week the team plans to ship a first batch of stoves with one of the trucks that periodically transport materials to ukraine.
 we hope of course that the stoves reach those who need them the most  and that they will be useful say björn and stefan.
 see you at four
 filip hultbrand
 filmens historia 75 hp
 marcus kartberg avd. chef gkn aerospace
 filmer  podcasts
 diversifying early childhood education and care  a postdoctoral study
 middle eastern conflicts in swedish classrooms
 we need to understand why we are the way we are
 moin syed university of minnesota
 social participation online by young people with intellectual disabilities
 social participation of young people with disabilities
 rapid start following production stop
 house factories tries ar technology
 what happens to engineers working in the digital transition?
 charlotte arghavan phd in informatics
 what happens to professional skills when work tasks are handed over to technology?
 anders sandblad phd in workintegrated learning
 films about primus
 how do we get everyone on the shop floor on board?
 lars walter professor of industrial workintegrated learning
 rapid restart following production stop
 project in collaboration with husqvarna gkn aerospace etc.
 you get a clearer picture of what the wooden truss looks like
 tony ringqvist wooden truss operator
 about students transition from grad school to working life
 about expobased learning in higher education
 the willingness to share is essential
 training interprofessional collaboration
 finance and politics fulltime campus fop100
 do the financial markets echo the decisions of political corridors and economic landscapes dance to the tune of policy frameworks or maybe it is the other way round? can a financial crisis lead to a political crisis? finance and politics course serves as a bridge to understand the interplay between these two powerful realms this time putting finance in the focal point. we will look at role of various players investors financial institutions information providers administration and oversight to gain understanding how financial markets operate and how they impact the global economy. we will learn the characteristics of basic financial instruments offered to investors. finally we will also reflect on the role of ethics and innovation on financial markets and analyse the roots of the greatest financial crises.
 university administration
 responsible for the organizations financial processes.
 the departments overall assignments
 to be a support function for financial decisions and accounting
 provide financial assignments for the management decisions at different levels
 supplier and customer invoices and payments
 budget followup and forecast
 tertial and year end closing
 staff finance
 accounting supervisor
 financial institutions and risk management fulltime campus fir400
 this course explains all aspects of financial risk and financial institution particularly banks regulation and reflect the major developments in the industry. the central issue is that the risks faced by financial institutions managers and the approaches through which these risks are managed are becoming increasingly similar whether an institution is chartered as a savings bank  a commercial bank an investment bank or an insurance company.
 financial reporting and analysis fulltime campus fir100
 the purpose of this course is to give students the knowledge to assess performance and financial position of listed companies regardless of its origin. the course provides a complete description of the analysis process for reports and a deep insight into financial reporting process under ifrs and us gaap.
 financial support for evaluationfollowup of crime prevention work
 the initiative early crime prevention parental support in preschool has been prepared locally in trollhättan and is based on theme meetingscourses at preschool for parents with a foreign background who live in social vulnerability and have children in preschool.
 preschool social services and the police jointly lead the meetings at the preschool based on different themes. the meetings are given on six occasions and each occasion is 1.5 hours. an interpreter is available as support. through dialogue information and increased knowledge it is intended that the effort contributes to parents experiencing increased trust in communitysupporting bodies such as school police and social services increased social control increased empowerment and selfconfidence as parents.
 the project consists of two parts part 1  interviews with parents who live in socially vulnerable areas with children of preschool age based on their parenting trust in authorities and need for support. part 2  evaluation of the intervention through questionnaires and interviews with participating parents. the work has started in january 2024 and the evaluationreport is planned to be ready in december 2025.
 with this knowledge the city of trollhättan together with the police can decide whether the investment should continue as part of early crime prevention work.
 find fulltext with libkey nomad
 when browsing to a website using your offcampus computer you can use the libkey nomad browser extension. libkey will tell you with a popup window if you can access articles on the website via university west login.
 libkey nomad also finds open access articles and works with google scholar and pubmed.
 read more about how libkey nomad works.
 the extension works in chrome edge firefox brave vivaldi and safari browsers.
 download libkey nomad to your browser
 download libkey nomad. this is where the addon ends up in your browser
 when you install the addon you must select university west the first time you use it.
 a popup window will appear to let you know that you can gain access. if you dont get a popup window doublecheck that you allow popups in your browser.
 after you click on download pdf log in with username e.g. buba0001 without @student.hv.se or @hv.se and password that you use to log in to the university systems if you are not on campus.you only need to log in once per browser session to gain access to all of the library subscriptions. the extension can also find open access articles.
 feedback
 if you have any questions you can reach us via the chat or email in the popup window.
 how to find us
 by car
 take the road e45 north from göteborg to trollhättan. when in trollhättan follow the signs to innovatum.
 there are direct flights from stockholm to trollhättanvänersborg airport which is located just 15 minutes by car from innovatum technology park.
 there are direct train connections to trollhättan from göteborg and oslo. the train ride from göteborg takes about 3540 minutes. the train from stockholm has one connection.bus 21 direction skoftebyn takes you from trollhättan central station at the city centre to the innovatum area. our bus stop is innovatum.
 look at the map
 here you can see our location
 here you will find maps and building of campus restaurant västan and other premises.
 below you will find a map of the campus with explanations
 a  student unionb  gregarts student book storec  central café student healthd  entré aile  main entrance restaurant västan libraryf  stråket entrance floor albertsaleng  servicecenterh  computer rooms and group study. creative centre.i j  study area ishavet and vita havet with student kitchenettes computer rooms lockers and group study. study area medelhavet with computer room lockers and quiet study room.
 find your facilities
 the letter illustrates in which building you find the facility and the first number shows on what floor. example f211  you find f211 in the fhouse on the 2nd floor.
 in case of fire alarm signal
 go out by the nearest exit
 go to the assembly point maria alberts park the park outside albertsalen. map link
 finite element method mathematical formulation and applications parttime campus fem410
 this course in the finite element method fem is focused on solid and structural mechanics and heat flow. the aim of the course is to provide a theoretical understanding of the finite element method along with practical usage of a commercial finite element software. project assignments are used for illustrating how the finite element method can be used to solve a range of different engineering problems. for example in the last project comparisons between simulation results with practical measurements are made.
 mat101mathematics a and
 mat220mathematics b and
 rtk300technical drawing and cad or the equivalent.
 fire
 this is how you act in the event of a fire in the universitys premises.
 if theres a fire
 watch the film and take part of the information published further down on this webpage.
 exit through the nearest emergency exit
 assembly point campus maria alberts park the park outside the albert hallhere you will find a map with the assembly point on campusassembly point ptc assembly point at the blue sign at the parking lot outside the entrance nohabgatan 18 a on the other side of the pedestrian crossing. if you have visitors make sure they accompany you to the assembly point.
 if you find that there is a fire
 rescue anyone who is in immediate danger and evacuate the premises.
 warn anyone who is threatened or affected by the fire so that they too can get to safety.
 alert the emergency services ambulance and police via sos on telephone 112.
 only turn off the fire if you believe you can handle it.
 close the doors to reduce the spread of smoke and fire.
 escape via the nearest emergency exit. if the room fills with smoke  crawl under the smoke there is fresher air and better view.
 remember to always note the nearest emergency exit and pay attention to the evacuation plan.
 extinguishing equipment is located at strategic locations and is specified in the evacuation plan both on campus and on ptc.
 if you have questions concerning fire please contact sveneric löfgren järnerot.
 although for centuries firms have been expanding internationally globalization and new technological advancement during the last century expedite the growth and expansion of the modern firms in foreign markets. the growth and expansion of the internationalizing firms have significant impact on economy environment and society. in order for students to understand the importance of the existence of multinational firms and their impact in the world it is necessary for them to learn the antecedents and consequences of internationalization the process of internationalization and how firms seek and develop opportunities resources and capabilities for their growth and sustenance through interacting with other actors in a network context. this course aims to create a strong theoretical background for students in the international business programme by providing them with the most important theoretical perspectives on firms internationalization. the students are expected to learn
 why firms internationalize
 how firms internationalize
 how firms create opportunities resources and capabilities for internationalization
 entrepreneurial decision making approach behind internationalization
 innovation internationalization and sustainability
 bachelor degree of 180 he credits with 90 he credits in the major subject field of business administration or equivalent.
 first in the world to evaluate traumainformed yoga in forensic psychiatry
 josefin wikström during the training at university west trollhattan sweden. photo danny cranmer
 after our previous very promising results from prison inmates population the question was natural could these positive effects of yoga be measured in other correctional settings too such as within forensic psychiatric care says nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry at university west in sweden who is the project leader of the national study.
 specially developed yoga classes
 in sweden those who have committed a crime and suffer from a serious mental disorder are sentenced to compulsory forensic psychiatric care. these patients will have the possibility to participate in the new study that will evaluate the effect of 10 weeks traumainformed yoga practice as complement to care as usual in a quasiexperimental study design.
 the specifically developed and to this patient group adapted yoga can serve as support to ease the most common symptoms seen in forensic psychiatry. from those forensic psychiatry clinics where the traumainformed yoga is already offered to patient several positive changes were reported by patients and clinical staff says josefin wikström founder of traumainformed yoga in sweden and director of programs for prison yoga project europe who is the main responsible for the yoga classes in the swedish study.
 patientcentered adaptations
 the staff training lasted for four days last week with a schedule where theory sessions alternated with practical exercises.
 josefin wikström tells us about the content of the theory classes which among other subjects address why yoga is good for psychiatry patient groups how this specifically designed yoga is structured and how to adapt exercises to different conditions.
 after this training the future yoga inspirators clinical staff have to practice at home using a digital platform that contains recorded digital material and accompanying manual with the help and supervision of the yoga responsible educators of the study. the classes which will start together with the study during the autumn consist of simple easily accessible and safe methods.
 the responsible yoga educator in the national project is josefin wikström an internationally licensed yoga teacher educator trained in traumatic stress at the trauma center in boston and harvard medical school as well as in medical yoga therapy at the minded institute in london. participating educators are eva seilitz the founder of the yoga project krimyoga former national coordinator in the swedish prison and probation service and maria engdal physiotherapist from the forensic psychiatric regional clinic in öjebyn sweden.
 contact nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry university west sweden nora.kerekes@hv.se 46739013403
 first week
 requirements of the students at the first course or programme start
 although the students are already webregistered meeting with the students on the first day plays an important function. they receive confirmation that they have been accepted and are in the right hall or forum. as a new student and perhaps new in the city there are often many practical things besides the studies that need to be arranged therefore it helps the students to know what will happen in the first weeks of the education.
 remember to never promise space to students who are not on the course list and never allow students who are not accepted to follow the teaching as it may be perceived as having been given a place. there may be reserves that have a higher ranking on the reserve list. refer these students to the admission through the service center.
 students need to understand the schedule and be able to find in the universitys premises
 where  how do students find their schedule in canvas how should this be read and how are schedule changes communicated?
 in which buildings will the students have teaching?
 how do the students find the different rooms in the houses ie how are the room numbers constructed? here you will find premises on campus. for premises that students can use for lunch and such you will find here.
 it is also important that students get information about parking where the library is located and that they need a västkort  here are films to show.
 students need of information during the first weeks of education
 in all communication information needs to be repeated clarified and deepened in order to be effective and a certain repetition facilitates both students and teachers. it is also important to make students understand that a lot of information they need to immerse themselves in. as a teacher you can assist by pointing out the resources that exist and the conditions that apply.
 keep in mind that reserve and late admitted applicants who made an application for education after the last registration date students need to receive the same information as the other accepted.
 explain how communication in the course works
 a large part of the communication with your students is done digitally and it is therefore important that you know and can handle the communication options in canvas. read more about how you can work with your digital communication at akademus. do not take for granted that the students understand how digital communication works instead go through how it functions at the first course session. also take the opportunity to inform them about how quickly they can expect a response and at what times so you create realistic expectations and a good working environment for everyone.
 physical meetings and dropin
 keep in mind that you cannot refer students to contact you at your office as they no longer have access to these areas on campus. you will therefore need a strategy for how unscheduled meetings with students should be handled for example by extending teaching sessions or having specific times for physical dropins in locations outside the department.
 for those of you who have students who have vfu
 it is important that you inform your students that they need to apply in good time for an extract from the load register that they themselves have to pay for travel costs how they get their vfu place and other practical information they need.
 feel free to show the students this page in swedish where they can find useful information about vfu themselves.
 students need a deeper understanding of the course structure
 in order to be able to plan their work understand what is expected and thereby take responsibility for their studies students need a deeper understanding of the course structure. the following is what you can do to support the students and facilitate yourself.
 for courses
 do a review of the syllabus and explain central college terms in the syllabus
 explain how learning objectives work methods  learning activities examination and assessment are linked in this particular course
 feedback from previous course evaluations  to increase the motivation of students to complete course evaluations themselves
 give an idea of what the education can lead to in the form of continued studies and working life for example through visits by alumni
 present elements of wil such as internship  placement vfu and opportunities for study abroad
 review  repeat the communication systems used eg canvas kronox and ladok learning platform
 student support at university west
 by informing about which student support is offered at the university such as the library language resource center mattejourenmath help center funka study and career guidance only available in swedish academic study coaching and student health service with lectures  workshops  guidance reduces the risk of students completing their studies.
 you can also tip about the calendar currently only available in swedish where students will find various lectures events workshops and courses provided by among others. student health during the term. check out what they offer for the term. student health can also support students in mental illness related to the study situation.
 it is also important that students receive information on
 what we have for software so that students get access to the office package free of charge during their studies
 show students preferably with the help of the library what databases they can use how and when
 this course equips students with the tools required to understand the construction the pricing and the risks of bonds and fixed income derivatives. the course introduces students to the stateoftheart analytical tools and management strategies currently used by financial leaders.
 verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english benglish 6 in the swedish upper secondary school or equivalent
 workplace health promotion whp
 massouh b. danielsson f. ramasamy s. khabbazi m.  zhang x. 2024. online hazard detection in reconfigurable plug  produce systems. lecture notes in mechanical engineering.
 nilsson a. danielsson f.  svensson b. 2023a. customization and flexible manufacturing capacity using a graphical method applied on a configurable multiagent system. robotics and computerintegrated manufacturing 79.
 nilsson a. danielsson f.  svensson b. 2023b. from cad to plug  produce a generic structure for the integration of standard industrial robots into agents. international journal of advanced manufacturing technology 1281112.
 ramasamy s. bennulf m. zhang x. hammar s.  danielsson f. 2023. online path planning in a multiagentcontrolled manufacturing system. lecture notes in mechanical engineering.
 bennulf m. danielsson f. svensson b.  lennartson b. 2021. goaloriented process plans in a multiagent system for plug  produce. ieee transactions on industrial informatics 174.
 focus on smart circular and humancentered industrial automation
 industrial automation has undergone rapid evolution driven by advancements in technology and the pursuit of efficiency safety and productivity. from the early days of simple mechanical systems to todays sophisticated cyberphysical ai systems the landscape of industrial automation continues to transform.    focus on university west smart circular and humancentric industrial automation with focus on plug  produce.
 plug  produce modular automation systems where new products and resources can be seamlessly incorporated into an existing system without significant downtime or complex setup.
 smartness ai systems incorporating multiagent technology machine learning and optimised decisionmaking.
 circularity automation systems that enable the reuse of resources robots machines tools etc. and products.
 humancentric automation systems that are centred around i human interaction for production planning and ii collaborative features for smart and safe humanmachine interaction.
 flexibility automation systems that quickly adapt to changing requirements product variations or external factors without the need for extensive reprogramming.
 prowil   the humancentric smart automation project  prowil project envisions the development of sustainable smart automation systems that integrate human perspectives when introducing novel technology. the project will equip the industry with the capabilities to adapt to changing environments by integrating smart automation with smart management. this integration will enable production goals to be achieved in existing or new automated equipment significantly reducing changeover times and leveraging knowledge and learning. prowil can contribute to how the industry can manage new productsgoalstechnology by utilizing inhouse knowledge and other organisational resources and that the changeover time can be done in hours or days rather than weeks or months.  the humancentric perspective of manufacturing is here referring to the need to acknowledge human strengths and competencies for reaching sought efficiency of smart manufacturing in future factories in line with industry 5.0. the expected impact of this interdisciplinary synergy project is a more resilient production that promotes a balanced and inclusive humancentric smart automation. the outcome of prowil is a groundbreaking method for implementing humancentric smart robotized processes. this project seeks to answer how to synergize technology development and management to achieve humancentric smart automation. this application is jointly designed by university west högskolan väst hv and the following industry partners anva ksg gkn aerospace  inwoco mim safe saab group business areas aeronautics and surveillance ultramare and volvo bussar. högskolan väst  prowil  synergy  humancentric smart automation hv.se
 clouds  intelligent algorithms to support circular solutions for sustainable production system will deliver aibased tools for digitalization and scheduling in flexible production systems enabling leadingedge sustainable manufacturing of electrified vehicles and remanufacture of products. the industrial impact of digital modelling with aibased scheduling accelerates resourceefficient manufacturing capable of balancing both the humans and machines workloads in highly resilient and flexible production systems. the project results are targeted towards promoting the industries to become resourceefficient more sustainable and addressing the circular solutions. the results are fourfold 1 an aibased tool for material flow that tunes the overall line balance such that each station can adjust production demand and balance the human workload in the production line 2 for resource efficiency a sustainable automated smart digitalized tool will be developed that enables 100 digital workflow update and use the available models to make rapid updates and validation of new production configurations i.e. reusing of resources 3 robust and resilient scheduling tool for efficient resource management and optimal energy use of agvs 4 demonstrate the digital model functionality optimization strategy for production planning and the virtual commissioning method in an industrial testbed. project partners university west chalmers university volvo group trucks operations ab volvo and gkn aerospace ab gkn. högskolan väst  clouds  intelligent algorithms to support circular solutions for sustainable production system hv.se
 senior lecturer                        docent  associate professor in production systems
 industrial automation involves the use of technology and machinery to automate tasks and processes in manufacturing and other industrial settings. typically industrial goals are to improve efficiency quality and the work environment while reducing costs and enhancing overall productivity.
 the goal is competitive automated oneoff manufacturing. oneoff refers to the production of a single item or a small batch of items typically customized or madetoorder as opposed to mass production where large quantities of identical items are produced.
 thematic leader  flexible automation
 flexible welding automation
 the toolbox will be based on noncontact sensors and appropriate algorithms for robotized welding. the scientific goal is to understand and implement sufficient and necessary flexibility in welding cells in order to obtain approved quality in welded joints.
 project descriptionto arrive at flexible automatic solutions there is a need for knowledge about what variations and disturbances can occur and how to monitor and compensate for them.the project identifies what parameters must be monitored online in order to guarantee approved weld quality and how this information can be used for control purposes. since these demands and solutions differ from situation to situation generic solutions are sought for. a generic solution demands a versatile framework for data acquisition data analysis data storage algorithm development and implementation and that is the starting point of the project.
 followup project  together we support all children dalsland
 food and food service
 food production is the source of about a quarter of the worlds emissions of greenhouse gases.
 the largest part of these emissions is related to the kinds of food we choose to eat but also factors like the method of production and food waste affect the levels of emission summary report of the eatlancet commission 201917.
 objective emissions brought about by food and food service will measured in carbon dioxide equivalency gradually be reduced and by 2045 will be at a level that complies with the international and national climate objectives. the emissions that remain will be compensated for by reducing emissions and carbon negative emissions in other areas.
 measures to be taken for reducing carbon emissions are focused on serving climatesmart food and beverages reducing food waste and minimizing the use of environmentally unfriendly singleuse products. to make climatesmart choices possible systems must be developed to underscore the impact on the environment that comes from food and beverages and to follow up on our objectives for reducing our impact on the environment. climate demands that we can follow up on must be made when signing contracts with catering services and the university must collaborate in various ways by making sustainability and climate demands on the restaurants that we have contracts with. even students and employees are encouraged to participate in the universitys efforts to develop a selection of sustainable and climatesmart foods and beverages that are served on campus.
 arts and creative industries kontaktperson christian master östlund
 entrepreneurship and innovation kontaktperson sabrina luthfa
 inclusion and social justice kontaktperson marie vesterlind
 university west in your language
 for spanish speaking students
 sobre university west
 for students from brazil
 sobre a university west
 teste  pontuação mínima exigidaacademic ielts  6.5 no module below 5.5toefl ibt paper based  575 at least 4.5 in written testtoefl ibt internet based  90 at least 20 in written test
 for students from china
 for students from germany
 for students from greece
 test  minimum required scoreacademic ielts  6.5 no module below 5.5toefl ibt paper based  575 at least 4.5 in written testtoefl ibt internet based  90 at least 20 in written test
 for students from iran
 for students from italy
 for students from romania
 despre university west
 for students from the netherlands
 university west hakkında
 are you a student at university west? below you can find information about what stars eu can offer you as a student and how you can get involved.
 as a student you have the opportunity to participate in shorter exchange courses where part of the course is given digitally and part is given on site at one of our partner universities where you meet students from all over europe. the courses that are open for registration can be found here
 the student board
 stars eu has its own student board which consists of three students from each university. as a student representative you get to learn more about the work in stars eu and are given the opportunity to influence what happens within the alliance. if you are interested in joining the board contact the vice president of the student union at university west.
 each grant awarded provides a grant of up to 3000per involved partner and can be used to cover costs related to international consortium meetingswriting sessions and external consultancy services needed to prepare a funding application.
 to be eligible the application must include at least three stars eu partners and be submitted to stars eu at least three months before the deadline for submission of the planned horizon europe or fp10 call.
 read more about seed grants here
 thematic interest groups tigs
 the stars eu thematic interest groups are
 arts and creative industries contact person christian master östlund
 entrepreneurship and innovation contact person sabrina luthfa
 energy transition contact person evert agneholm
 healthy ageing contact person margareta karlsson
 living spaces contact person petter ahlström
 2021 publicerades boken parenting across cultures from childhood to adolescence development in nine countries.
 coventry university storbritannienhögskolan väst sverigelimburg catholic university college belgienfriedrichalexander university tysklandwest midlands european centre belgien
 changing attitudes to dating violence in adolescents
 sicomap  background and short facts
 sicomap is an acronym for simulation and control of material affecting processes.
 form admitted with a condition
 if you are conditionally admitted you have to upload your complete transcript and degree certificate at universityadmissions.se or antagning.se. after you have done that we kindly ask you to fill out the form below.
 please be aware that your degree needs to be registered in your account as equivalent to a swedish bachelors degree before you leave for sweden.
 personal number
 i have uploaded my documents at universityadmissions.se or antagning.se
 approved leave from studies
 notification for approved leave from studies
 admitted with conditionto the application form
 application for dispensation 45 he credits per term
 certificateto the application form for transcript of records registration certificate and course certificate web form
 course within programmecourse
 application_for_course_within_programme_coursepackage
 deferment of the studies
 application for deferment of the studies at university west.pdf
 ethical review
 confirmation of attendancecertificate of stay
 examination and summative assessmenthow to get my corrected exam informationunable to register to the exam web form
 interuptionto the application form for cancellationinterruption on a programmecourse web form
 scholarshipread more about university wests scholarship
 tuition feeonline form application for refund of tuidion fee
 fee600
 theodorsson annikathorsen ceciliatryggvason nina
 bberndtsson pernillabohlin veronica
 60 second anxiety reduction technique and explanation
 cosmic kids yoga
 helping kids make sense of their emotions during coronavirus
 reducing very intense emotion
 stop breath think
 selfcompassion 3 free classes
 resilience in challenging times
 meditation to calming the anxious mind
 emerging interaction technologies open lab
 företagsforskarskolan sicomap  simulation and control of material affecting processes
 emerging interaction technologies
 learning practices and digital technologies
 transformation managment
 callforpapers2023.plan.pdf
 grants and innovation office
 internationalisering
 wil 25  workintegrated learning
 wil 25  work integrated learning wil25 is the third international conference on workintegrated learning. the conference will be hosted by university west sweden in collaboration with kristiania university college. the conference will take place from september 29th t...
 kristiania university college oslo norway
 leads
 relearn
 ahilartificial and human intelligence through learning
 robot errror stop agent recovery tool
 human factors
 aknouchemartinsson hanna
 andersson anton
 andersson carolin
 andersson caroline
 andersson roy
 asplund carlsson maj
 axelsson christina
 axelsson tobias
 ben thayer firas
 birgerson thomaz
 blick sofia
 bohlin therese
 bohlin veronica
 borg andreas
 brolin sofia
 carlberger thomas
 carlbring marianne
 carlsson kim
 cliffordson christina
 cronholm catharina
 de blanche andreas
 fors camilla
 ganvir ashish
 gustafsson andreas
 haioty isra
 hansson thomas
 hassel cathrine
 herath mudiyanselage inoka
 hermansson anna
 herrman margaretha
 hillerborn tina
 hilletofth per
 hultbrand filip
 höjemo thomas
 idoffisberg monica
 jobe william
 jonsson catharina
 larsson christer
 larsson victor
 lext christoffer
 lindroth tomas
 lundqvist thomas
 mattsson beatrice
 ohlsson christian
 opheim arve
 pederson thomas
 pehrsson tobias
 petersson andreas
 raghottam bellary rakshith
 rath susanne
 rolseth lars
 roychowdhury sushovan
 shahlaei charlotte arghavan
 theliander jan
 theodorsson annika
 thibblin anders
 thid micael
 thorén bosse
 thorn jessica
 thorolvsen ebba
 thorsen cecilia
 thorstensson lisa
 tonander carl
 towns ann
 waern patric
 wallman anders
 wihlborg clas
 wilhelmsson georgia
 winman thomas
 winroth hallqvist elisabeth
 binar thermal spray
 bosch rexroth
 cape breton university
 chobe district council i botswana
 dive imaging systems gmbh
 element materials technology
 epoch wires limited
 graphmatech ab
 lin education
 maintmaster systems ab
 masterflow ab
 northcone
 nordic choice hotels
 northwest met tech
 purtech ab
 rebl industry
 richardsson verktygsservice ab
 sandvik additive manufacturing
 seco tools
 stony brook university usa
 the european network for religious education through contextual approaches enreca
 university college nordjylland ucn
 university of indianapolis indiana usa
 university of nottingham
 university of paderborn tyskland
 university of sydney
 university of the western cape
 xmreality
 cleanergy
 sunnerdahl disability foundation
 totechnordic parts
 wallenberg global learning network
 freiia  facilitating resilience empowerment learning from islands regions innovation approaches
 immersive learning environments for sustainable competence development
 impacter  enhanced understanding of powder bed fusionelectron beam processing of nibase superalloys through in situ highenergy xray studies
 leadhybrid  leadership and coworkership in hybrid industries
 linguistic justice global migration and nordic welfare states
 mathmot co  constructing mathematics motivation in primary education. a longitudinal study in six european countries
 meshe  mental and somatic health without borders
 midas  determining hot cracking susceptibility in additive manufacturing using modeling and experimentation
 pipco  pain and inflammation in psychiatric conditions
 prowil  synergy  humancentric smart automation
 repam  resource efficient materials for additive manufacturing
 reptis  responsible extraction and processing of titanium and other primary raw and critical raw materials for sourcing eu industrial value chains and strategic sectors
 restart ii  operator guidance for machine error recovery through artificial intelligence and augmented reality
 unraveling the interplay between adolescent gaming and mental health
 verticle integrated projects for workintegrated learning
 wise  multiscale multiprocess machine for high valueadded products with disruptive functionalities
 this platform is a way to learn more about yogas effects in different clinical populations.
 skoog t. kapetanovic s.  sorbring e. 2022. study protocol for a mixeddesign evaluation of selfassured parentsa parenting support program for immigrant parents living in deprived areas in sweden with teenage children. public health in practice 3 100270.
 lindén c. skoog t.  kapetanovic s. 2023. raising teenage children in disadvantaged neighbourhoods the experiences and challenges of immigrant mothers in sweden. journal of family studies 294 15231545.
 kapetanovic s.  skoog t. in press. in their own words immigrant mothers experiences and perceptions of the groupbased selfassured parents program for parents in disadvantaged areas in sweden. journal of family studies.
 termin 4 btm200
 termin 5 boo200
 crossing boundariesteaching sensitive topics to international student
 wayne stephen coetzee ei offers insights from teaching sensitive subjects such as war the arms trade and socioeconomic development. he reflects on the challenges of teaching in culturally and educationally diverse student settings and shares strategies for transfor...
 service  it sit
 framfor info presentation 2018.pptx
 theo schewe
 the doctoral student shall after completing this course demonstrate knowledge and understanding of
 important paradigms in production technology both in the subject as a whole as well as within specific aspects of the subject
 the state of the art within production technology
 roadmaps within relevant areas of production technology
 methods to predict or foresee changes and shifts in technology in production technology
 the doctoral student shall demonstrate the ability
 to analyse trends and preconditions for change in paradigms and technology
 to perform gap analysis
 the doctoral student shall demonstrate knowledge of the way to approach
 im part of the library team system and metadata
 samplingbased path planning algorithm for a plug amp produce environment
 softwaresupported hazards identification for plug amp produce systems
 a method for configuring agents in plug amp produce systems
 optimized online path planning algorithms considering energy
 a conceptual model for multiagent communication applied on a plug amp produce system
 emile glorieux prithwick parthasarathy bo svensson fredrik danielsson
 verification and deployment of automatically generated robot programs used in prefabrication of house walls
 psop  a multiagent based control approach for flexible and robust manufacturing
 an adaptable process planning tool  a tool for information communication and interaction in a robot cell
 a new combined optimisation algorithm for sheetmetal press line tuning
 collaborative robots to support flexible operation in a manufacturing system
 flexible robotized automation in manufacturing systems
 a flexible lean automation concept for robotized manufacturing industry
 online hazard detection in reconfigurable plug amp produce systems
 online path planning in a multiagentcontrolled manufacturing system
 a framework for hazard identification of a collaborative plugampproduce system
 conceptual framework of scheduling applying discrete event simulation as an environment for deep reinforcement learning
 optimized path planning by adaptive rrt algorithm for constrained environments considering energy
 identification of resources and parts in a plug and produce system using opc ua
 automated path planning for plug produce in a cuttingtool changing application
 emile glorieux bo svensson prithwick parthasarathy fredrik danielsson
 a genetic algorithm with shuffle for job shop scheduling problems
 improving performance in flexible manufacturing by a psop approach
 integration of humans into a multiagent system
 a simulationbased optimization approach for holonic manufacturing systems
 offline parameter tuning of a sheetmetal press line
 staff member at division of production systems.
 a new particle swarm optimization algorithm for outlier detection  industrial data clustering inwire arc additive manufacturing
 system identification and closedloop control of laser hotwire directed energy deposition using the parametersignaturequality modeling scheme
 cfdbased feasibility study of laserdirected energy deposition with a metal wire for onorbit manufacturing
 effect of substrate orientation on melt pool during multilayer deposition in vgroove with gas metal arc
 influence of laser beam shaping on melt pool thermocapillary flow
 operator bias in the estimation of arc efficiency in gas tungsten arc welding
 operator influence on the estimation of arc efficiency in gas tungsten arc welding
 simulationbased feedback control of welding processes
 influence of laserwire interaction on heat and metal transfer in directed energy deposition
 comparative study of the main electromagnetic models applied to melt pool prediction with gas metal arc  effect on flow ripples from drop impact and geometry
 modelling of beam energy absorbed locally in conduction mode laser metal fusion
 beam offset detection in laser stake welding of tee joints based on photodetector sensing
 prediction of penetration in onesided fillet welds by inprocess joint gap monitoring  an experimental study
 barriers for industrial implementation of inprocess monitoring of weld penetration for quality control
 evaluation of noncontact methods for joint tracking in a laser beam welding application
 monitoring of laser beam welding by a nonintrusive optical sensor system using photodiodes
 optical methods for inprocess monitoring of laser beam welding
 heat input and temperatures in welding
 modeling and simulation for welding automation
 integration of finite element analysis and computer aided robotics for advanced programming of robotized welding
 tools for simulation based fixture design to reduce deformation in advanced fusion welding
 staff member at division of urban planning and development.
 bridging theory and practice through workintegrated learning wil  critical perspectives on the conceptualisations of wil at a university in sweden
 exploring barriers and facilitators to knowledge transfer and learning processes through a crossdepartmental collaborative project in a municipal organization
 rethinking wil for an academic discipline  the model of work integrated political studies wips
 deeqa odaway isabelle nerelius victoria fröst wilma lundqvistwestin fredrik sunnemark per assmo
 the boys the girls and the party  representations of gender and rape culture in three swedish adolescent films
 the idea of intercultural education and the dilemma of diversity
 who are we now then?  the swedish welfare state in political memory and identity
 how the politics of retrenchment was said and done  remodelling of concepts and roles in swedish welfare state discourse
 social sustainability for whom?  developing an analytical approach through a tripartite collaboration
 learning for utopia from banal to critical workintegrated learning wil
 achieving quality education through internationalization using digital technology  reflections on a collaborative international masters programme in workintegrated political studies
 fredrik sunnemark wilma lundqvistwestin per assmo laurence piper
 tamy al saad wilma lundqvistwestin per assmo fredrik sunnemark
 wil certification of the ippe undergraduate programme at university west
 knowledge and negotiation  theoretical observations in relation to the development of a master program in work integrated political studies and beyond.
 the meaning of health wellbeing and quality of life perceived by roma people in west sweden
 interculturalism. national identity citizenship and the populist right  the example of sweden
 film and ideology  remarks on a complicated relationship
 freeform modeling and assemblies parttime campus fms200
 the course consist of two parts. the first part is about assemblies. the assembly part focuses on the ability to visualize the correct movements that a composite mechanism has. also links of solid information between models as well as parameter connections between parts are used in this course.
 the second part that is the main focus of the course is freeform modeling. in this part you go through the basic theory of freeform modeling and carry out some practical exercises. the big part of the freeform part is to carry out a project. the project is about recreating a real product with freeform surfaces in a cad program.
 idf200integrals and differential equations or the equivalent.
 for three swedish parties  university west kosters framtid ab and kosterhavets national park it is the koster islands in strömstad municipality that are in focus.
 also involved in the project are the island communities of schiermonnikoog in the netherlands bornholm in denmark hvaler in norway and iles du ponant in france.
 the project is a continuation of the interreg project islands of innovation. there a model for selfevaluation tipping approach was developed for islands that showed how and in which areas they were equipped for local innovation. the model is based on how development can take place in collaboration between the municipality or equivalent and the local community on the island. the project freiia aims further to find models for implementation of local innovation with local and municipal actors in collaboration. lb4
 university west works with two main focuses in this project in slightly different ways. on the one hand we work to establish a longterm and mutual collaboration between the university and the koster islands while at the same time we design and develop forms and content for such collaboration.
 partly together with the projects dutch partner we are leaders within the projects work package that studies governance or control over the site. in freiias case governance over local innovation. who or who will have a say in local sustainable development?
 part of the central interreg project wants to develop a toolbox for how a municipality can support local innovation and development work. what a municipality is however means different scales and areas of responsibility in the different participating countries.
 from our perspective we are therefore looking at the levels of innovation management that are important at koster in particular. it includes not only policy and institutional frameworks but also the interaction between different local actors who together determine the priorities strategies activities and outcomes of sustainable innovation. processes for local innovation and development need to include users and citizens as well as local business. they should have the opportunity to be cocreators in a sustainable innovation system. it requires innovative coordination and integration between sectors areas levels of authority and different stakeholder groups. the project examines whether it is possible to find a structure for the process around a challenge or idea in a co and cocreative way which involves the local community and the municipality together.
 freiia freiia  interreg north sea partners contact us freiia  interreg north sea
 financial support for the department of health sciences ih
 be responsible for to jointly with academic partner compile the student forecast of the department
 financial administration of externally funded projects
 campus dalsland bäckefors  online
 shv  the student union at university west
 webborganisation
 ouriginal plagiatkontroll
 admitted to a doctoral degree programme within the field of production technology or equivalent.
 fyrbodal for the future of flex
 electrification and the flexible electricity system of the future have many different applications and applications. in this project we want to highlight three that have high relevance for society in general and the local power grids and energy systems in particular.
 brownfield increased electrification and capacity in existing builtup areas. how can you collaborate and find new and better opportunities and models to increase the use of electricity but not the maximum capacity utilization. here we want to look at smart charging demand flexibility of industries and local flex and storage services trollhättan ministaden
 greenfield electrification means new exciting industrial ventures and establishments. but how should these be best developed in order to offer flexibility and enable synergies and symbioses that facilitate increased electrification in a local and regional context. lysekil company establishment
 local and subregional community planning increased electrification sets completely new demands and issues in the municipalities work with community planning business promotion establishment but is also an extremely important part in meeting local climate goals. how can increased electrification become an enabler for flexibility synergies and integration in the rest of the energy system where municipal companies and operations such as public utilities energy companies and other operations play a large role.
 alumni gabriel now works as an engineer at scania
 meet gabriel bachmann a german engineer who found his calling in swedens electric vehicle industry. from studying mechanical engineering to pursuing a masters degree in sweden to becoming a test engineer at scania.
 with a background in mechanical engineering gabriels passion for electric vehicles led him to pursue a masters programme in electromechanical vehicle engineering at university west in sweden.
 i got myself an electric vehicle so i became really interested in the topic. and all of a sudden i found this programme says gabriel. it was very suiting for me because i have a mechanical background and i wanted to inform myself a bit more about electric vehicles. it was kind of just for fun at first but now i am working with electric vehicles.
 gabriel says that one of the reasons for studying in sweden in particular is the good reputation the country has in germany.
 in germany we consider sweden to be very advanced. i wanted to gather international experiences and also i wanted to advance my english a bit he explains.
 from germany to sweden
 as gabriel got close to completing his studies an unexpected opportunity presented itself when he connected with a fellow student working on a thesis at scania. intrigued by the exciting developments in the electric vehicle industry gabriel decided to take a leap of faith and apply for work at the company.
 i saw the job ad applied for it and now i am here. everything went very fast he says.
 with a sense of purpose and the prospect of making a tangible difference gabriel now works at scania as a test engineer.
 now i have the feeling that i can contribute to a more sustainable transport systems and to climate change.
 his role revolves around ensuring the seamless functioning of charging systems and electric trucks.
 we test charging systems for heavy electric vehicles. we listen into the vehicle  how is the power distributed what is the vehicle communicating to the charger and vice versa gabriel explains. basically we make sure that charging works.
 through gabriels work he actively participates in the global shift towards sustainable transportation.
 the goal is to be a part of the shift towards a sustainable future when it comes to transport systems to reduce carbon emissions and carbon pollution in the atmosphere. to make the earth a more sustainable place.
 the studies prepared him for work
 gabriels educational journey both back in germany and at university west equipped him with a strong foundation and a comprehensive understanding of electric vehicles.
 when it comes to a general understanding this master in electromechanical vehicle engineering prepared me very well he says. at the end of the day you learn the basics at your university and then later at work you learn by doing. but in general i got a good understanding of how things work.
 reflecting on his overall experience gabriel emphasizes the importance of the practical elements during his studies and encourages others to explore the opportunities in sweden.
 we did a lot of practical things during my master studies. it was not only theoretical he says.
 its a great experience and these skills will be very important in the future. so there will not be a lack of jobs gabriel explains. and its a very interesting field. you can contribute to something bigger. the way the programme is built is very good. so you get a very broad picture about the topic.
 gabriels journey from germany to sweden exemplifies the power of passion and seizing opportunities. and through his work he is leaving a mark on the path towards sustainable transportation one electric charge at a time.
 master in electromechanical vehicle engineering
 enhancing students creativity using projectbased learning in engineering in higher education  case study from sweden
 providing university students vith effective maths support
 do we deliver effective maths support for students?
 peerassisted learning in mathematics in higher education.
 competence development and employability prospects using nontraditional teaching methods in a changing higher education environment
 enhancing student employability prospects through competence development  using nontraditional methods in teaching mathematics in higher education
 comparative case study of using nontraditional methods in two contrasting educational environments implementing peerassisted learning in sweden and russia
 enhancing students performance in maths through supplemental instruction
 provision of maths support for student in higher education institutions
 higher education in change peerassisted learning applied to mathematics and physical science for engineers in sweden and russia
 using peerassisted learning in mathematics and physics in higher education in sweden and russia
 using peerassisted learning in sweden and russia  preparing active citizens for their future professional life
 developing generic and subject specific competences through nontraditional teaching methods
 using problembased and peerassisted learning in teaching mathematics to university students  focus on competence development
 gaming and mental health in children and young people in sweden
 the purpose of the study is to gain indepth knowledge about the links between gaming and mental health.
 welcome to university wests pages on generative ai genai. here are three steps to get started with genai and you can read about three different ways to relate to genai in your teaching ban allow or demand. here you can also immerse yourself in how genai tools can be used in teaching and examination. on a regular basis akademus offers workshops and other activities related to genai that you can book in for.
 three steps to get started with genai
 1. try it out and do your homework  be curious
 as a first step you need to understand how generative ai tools genai work and how they can be used in teaching and examination. there are a variety of genai tools that can be used in higher education for example to generate or review text and code or generate images. a suitable tool to start with is copilot which all staff and students at university west have access to. can you perhaps work more efficiently with the help of genai? also try to keep up to date with what is being written about genai how is genai used in your discipline nationally and internationally? how is genai used in the workplaces where students can look for work after completing their education? is there a common policy for your department or programme? how do your colleagues at university west do? if you want an introduction together with colleagues at hv you can book a workshop with us at akademus.
 2. consider whether genai can promote learning and communicate clearly
 there are many different ways for students to use genai to support their learning. for example they can use genai
 as an extra teacher who never tires of defining and explaining concepts giving yet another example and who can interrogate them on the content
 such as a proofreader who finds spelling and grammatical errors or a writing tutor who can explain how the text can be more academic in tone
 as an idea to get the creative juices flowing
 to translate and summarise texts.
 feel free to use genai tools together with the students. show them how you do it and think out loud to give them a model of how they can do it. maybe you can also get help from students who have started with genai? how do they use the tools? what strengths and weaknesses do they see? next evaluate how genai has affected your teaching and student learning and consider whether student learning benefits from having access to genai in examinations as well.
 introduction to generative ai
 law and ethics
 working with examinations
 using genai in teaching
 universities in sweden have been given a government assignment to work on gender mainstreaming. the aim is that the activities shall contribute to reaching national political goals for gender equality. our current plan for gender mainstreaming activities applies to the period 20232025.
 what is gender mainstreaming and why should university west work with it?
 gender mainstreaming is swedens main political strategy for achieving the goals of national gender equality policy and a genderequal society. the political gender equality objectives are based on the un declaration of human rights 1948.
 the purpose of the initiative is for the higher education sector to contribute to the nationally declared gender equality objective of women and men having equal power to shape society and their own lives.
 unlike previous gender equality efforts which have often been timelimited and have only touched on parts of an activity the purpose of this initiative is to develop ways that systematically integrate a gender perspective at all levels and in all areas of activity.
 since gender equality is created where decisions are made resources are allocated and norms are created the gender mainstreaming perspective needs to be integrated throughout any activity. the purpose of gender mainstreaming is to counteract the issues that remain in the background and efforts that are conducted as an extra activity instead of being part of the daily work carried out by the employees in the organization.
 read more about intersectionality in swedish
 the plan and priority areas
 the plan is to have an orientation plan which means that it will be supplemented and revised as work progresses and our needs and opportunities become clearer.
 plan for gender mainstreaming at university west 20232025
 in its efforts the government has specifically identified three priority areas for institutions of higher education to work with
 the need to counter gendered education choices
 improvements in womens and mens completion rates
 all sections of the university are involved in identifying initiatives and participating in the universitys gender mainstreaming efforts. working on this also involves participants outside the university especially the employers that the university collaborates with.
 a report on the results based on the plan will be in the universitys annual report for 20232025.
 reports
 sustainable development at university west
 gender equality  prioritized area in our sustainability work
 your personal integrity is important to us at university west. therefore we are concerned that processing of personal data is done in a correct and safe manner in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
 university west is responsible for all processing of personal data in the universitys activities. this web page describes how we treat your personal information what rights you have and how you can apply them.
 what personal data we process and why?
 university only processes information about you if you have agreed to it or if it is necessary to perform a task in the public interest or in official authority or as provided by law or contract.
 most data that university processes about you is collected directly from you. what information we process depends on the purpose of the processing. in some cases we also collect information from other sources such as the swedish tax agency or the university and higher education council.
 among other things it may be as follows
 personal data that you provide to us on the web physical forms in contact with employees at the university via email and letters as well as using the universitys it systems and services.
 personal information you provide to us in connection with the registration of an event such as contact details. why we do it is informed in the individual case. we usually need the tasks to plan and manage the event as well as communicate with you.
 study documentation and other study administrative information including information on eligibility qualifications participation in education examination and assignments study results information on registration and tuition fees. the information is needed to enable us to take you as a student to complete courses document studies follow up evaluate report and administer education and administer scholarships registration and tuition fees as well as exchange students.
 contact information you provide to us when applying for a library card at the university library. the information needed to lend library materials and administer loans and purchases.
 information about your health for example to accommodate requests for special food at events or the need for special educational support and to provide student health care. we usually ask you to approve our processing of this information before collecting and processing.
 social security number if clearly justified by the purpose of the processing for example that we should not confuse you with another person or if it is otherwise required to secure your identity.
 bank details and other financial information to pay money or invoice.
 personal data that you provide when you apply for a position.
 personal data necessary for employment such as details of an employment form duration scope of employment assignment salary union membership service planning parental leave sick leave medical certificate and electronic identities as a username. the information is required by the university to fulfil its obligations in the field of labor law with the employment contract the law and collective agreements in order to work at the university as well as to manage plan pursue and develop the universitys activities.
 how do we protect your personal data?
 the university undertakes legal technical and organizational measures to protect your personal data against unauthorized or unlawful access and other treatment as well as against loss destruction or damage.
 the measures are aimed at ensuring adequate protection of personal data considering the risk of processing of the data.
 who get part of your personal data?
 as a starting point only the employees at the university who need your personal data at work will receive some part of the data. in addition the central administrative personnel of the university have access to your information and can use them if necessary for example for troubleshooting and support.
 a large part of the information available at the university is public documents. this means that if your personal information is a public document as a starting point anyone who requests the document can access your personal data in accordance with the public access to information and secrecy act.
 in addition to this your personal data may be disclosed to authorities such as the central student support board the swedish migration agency statistics sweden the university chancellors office the tax agency the social insurance agency and other colleges and universities.
 they can also be shared with suppliers partners and other third parties who need access to them. the university only shares your personal data if necessary and if you have approved it or we may do so by law. when the personal data provided to another party university take appropriate measures to protect your personal information.
 where we process your personal data?
 regardless of the country in which the data is processed the university undertakes measures to protect them in accordance with the requirements of the eu  eea.
 personal data may only be processed outside the eu  eea if the eu commission has decided that the country in question has an adequate level of protection or after appropriate protective measures have been taken.
 how long do we save your personal data?
 we only save your personal data if necessary regarding the purpose of the processing and requirements of law or regulations. rules on how long the university is required to save different information is included in the archives act and the national archives code of statutes. often it means that your personal information is saved for between two years and for all future.
 university website
 the universitys website uses socalled cookies. cookies are small text files that are created and stored on your device when you visit our site and contain information about the visit.
 read more about cookies
 we use cookies for certain services and features that make the site better for visitors to work. we also use cookies to collect information about how you use our site such as which pages are visited and how long the visit will last for statistical purposes to customized and improve the site.
 learn more about how we use cookies and how to disable cookies.
 your rights
 right of access
 the university is open to how we process your personal data. you are entitled to know what information we are processing about you for what purpose and what personal data may be provided to another recipient.
 keep in mind that as a student or employee at the university you can usually log in to the universitys it system to see what information we are dealing with about you. you can also contact responsible person at the university to get information about what information is being processed about you such as the hr division.
 right of withdrawal
 in some cases we may ask for consent approval to process your personal data. if you leave such consent you may withdraw this at any time. we will not then continue to process your personal information. data already published is influenced however is usually not a withdrawal of consent.
 you have the right in certain cases to get your personal information in a widely used format to transfer them to another person responsible for personal data.
 right to rectification
 you are entitled to have your personal information changed or supplemented if they prove to be incorrect or incomplete.
 keep in mind that you as a student or employee at the university can change information by logging in to the respective it systems or by contacting the person responsible atwithin the university.
 right to restriction
 you have a right that in some cases to get a certain processing of your personal data limited or terminated.
 right to erasuredeletion
 you have a right that in some cases to get your personal information deleted.
 right to file a complaint with the data inspectorate
 you are entitled to complain about our processing of your personal data to the data inspectorate.
 more information about your rights
 read more about your rights on the data inspection web pages.
 university west461 86 trollhättantel 05202230 00email id registrator@hv.se
 data protection officer  the swedish data protection authority
 university wests data protection officer is anne lindelöf
 the data protection officers task is to ensure that the university processes personal data in a legal correct and safe manner in accordance with the data protection ordinance.
 generative ai gen ai are artificial intelligence models that generate content in the form of written text audio images or videos. on this page youll find information and tips on how to properly use gen ai tools. you can use gen ai tools to help you in your studies in a variety of ways provided you do so with knowledge and thoughtfulness.
 an important starting point when considering using any gen ai tool is that you always need to have sufficient subject knowledge to determine whether what is written in the generated text is correct and relevant. compare with other sources and dont assume that the information in the text is accurate. gen ai is not particularly skilled at conveying factual information.
 before you use gen ai tools in your studies and examinations ask yourself the following question
 can i use gen ai tools for this task?
 university wests policy on gen ai see 2.2 11 and 15 states that information about the usenon use of gen ai must be included in all syllabi.
 if you are allowed to use gen ai in the course have following in mind
 is this good for my learning or am i missing something by using the gen ai tool?
 writing good prompts instructionsquestions for gen ai is an important part of the use. success factors are to be clear specific provide context ask follow up questions use keywords and above all test your way forward. imagine youre having a conversation with the gen ai tool.
 if you receive and have used a gen ai tool in an examination you must refer to what you have retrieved from the gen ai tool. in our referencing guides you can find templates for this.
 you need to know what applies to cheating and plagiarism as well as the possible consequences of cheating.
 how can gen ai tools benefit your studies?
 gen ai can help you organize your time and create effective study plans.
 use gen ai as a tireless study coach for questions and explanations. tell the gen ai tool to act as a coach so it doesnt give you the answers. enter text and get questions back.
 get help with ideas and inspiration for your writing projects.
 ask for examples of different text genres if you are unsure of how to write a text.
 get help with spelling grammar and text structure.
 use gen ai for translations.
 improve your written and oral skills through simulations and exercises.
 gen ai and source evaluation
 being source critical is an ability you need to possess in many different situations. when using gen ai tools it is important to consider whether the answers you will get to your prompts are true. when you get answers from gen ai try to see through possible language and factual errors or biased information.
 georgia wilhelmsson
 get started with onedrive
 how do i activate onedrive?
 follow these steps to activate onedrive
 log in to
 click on onedrive. please note the first time you click on onedrive there will be a delay when your account is created and activated.the message were almost ready may appear. this means that your account is created and is being activated.
 when your account is created a folder and file view will appear when you click onedrive.
 how do i upload files to onedrive?
 click on onedrive.
 to upload a file click the option upload choose the file you want to upload and click open. if you want to create a new document click new.
 to delete a file or a folder click the dots ... beside the object click them once again and click delete.
 there is a builtin help in onedrive. just click the question mark in the upper right corner to access it.
 watch videoclip
 video upload files and folders to onedrive
 do you need more help with onedrive?  go to microsoft guides
 get to know stars eu
 what is stars eu and what are the current developments within the alliance? what can stars eu offer employees and students? meet some of the people who work with the alliance at university west.
 meet elin frändberg who works as stars eu officer at university west.
 meet fredrik christensson who works with the regional transition accelerator.
 here youll learn how to travel to trollhättan.
 landvetter airport in gothenburg has daily flights to and from most major european cities. there is a convenient airport bus service connecting landvetter to central station in gothenburg. buses run two to four times an hour.
 trains run regularly to trollhättan from gothenburg central station. the trip takes approximately 30 minutes. gothenburg also has intercity rail links with stockholm copenhagen and oslo.
 arrival by car
 the university is located in the center of trollhättan next to drottningtorget and on the opposite side of the town hall and a large water tower that is easy to see. you turn off from highway 45 at the roundabout where signs show towards the center. school parking accessed from the city hall roundabout right into gustava melin street and is signposted.
 if youre a visitor check in at servicecenter to get a parking permit which is valid in combination with payment by parking meter or app.
 trains and buses run regularly to trollhättan from gothenburg. the trip to the town is approximately 35 minutes by train. buses complete the trip in approximately 90 minutes. the central bus station in gothenburg nils ericson terminal is located next to the train station central station. gothenburg also has intercity rail links with stockholm copenhagen and oslo.
 landvetter airportthe airport has daily flights to and from most major european cities. there is a convenient airport bus service that connects landvetter to the central station in gothenburg. buses run 24 times an hour.
 trollhättan vänersborg airportthe airport has  frequent services to bromma airport stockholm
 study counsellor
 global assembly instruction strategies 2 gais 2
 companies are getting more and more global in order to be closer to the endmarket. this put great demands in a wellstructured information system.
 rq1 how do different strategies in manufacturing engineering processes affect the flexibility in assembly instructions at a global level?
 rq2 what methods and standards are suitable for global information sharing regarding instructions for operators in assembly systems?
 rq3 how can technology be utilized to improve learning curve effects and reduce timetoknowledge and create flexibility for information and knowledge sharing?
 rq4 how can knowledge sharing be improved in order to decrease learning curve for operators?
 gais 2 aims to develop models and strategies to be able to decide whether to have a decentralized or centralized approach within the manufacturing engineering process and for the user interface of assembly instruction. furthermore to have a structured learning process with the most suitable technologies in order to decrease the learning curve and to increase the quality of learning. gais 2 also aims for attract younger people by offering flexibility and new technologies for learning and assembling.
 global conflicts with local consequences
 global health in an era of sustainable development parttime distance ghu600
 global health in an era of sustainable development 7.5 hp
 this course introduces global health in relation to the un sustainable development goals. basic concepts and measures relevant to global health are studied together with the un sustainable development goals in order to contribute to an understanding of how these can be useful to deal with current health challenges worldwide. the course offers an international course environment including an independent work addressing local health challenges to be discussed with students in other parts of the world and how they address similar health challenges. the course is given in collaboration with international partner universities.
 bachelor 180 he credits within caring science nursing or equivalent.
 you also need english 6
 distance without gathering week 09
 global health online application
 essentials of global health in an era of the sustainable development goals
 please enter application details below
 all students must be nominated by their home university prior to application.
 once your application has been submitted you will receive a confirmation of successful submission.
 this course focuses on studying the interrelation of politics and economics in the context of global dynamics. hence the focal concern of this course is the integration of political and economic factors in our analysis of modern society. global political economy is an interdisciplinary field and draws on several social science disciplines to explain and understand the forces that shape global developments. students will explore the main theoretical assumptions methodological approaches and dynamics of the global political economy. overall the course provides an accessible introduction to understanding these processes from a comparative perspective.
 glocal challenges and applied approaches to sustainable development fulltime campus guu100
 glocal challenges can be understood as a perspective on development and change where the interaction between challenges on a global and local level is in focus. the approach is based on the premise that glocal challenges such as climate change or a pandemic need to be addressed both at a comprehensive international level together between nations but also at local level in different countries cities governments companies and between individuals.
 the course aims to provide an overview of glocal challenges. it also provides indepth knowledge of how glocal challenges are managed at a global level and how strategies and other tools can be used to deal with global challenges in local contexts. the course focuses on sustainable development and discusses economic social and ecological dimensions of sustainability and how these can be taken into account when dealing with glocal challenges. the course is based on an economic perspective on global challenges but is supplemented with knowledge from other social science fields such as political science business administration informatics media and design.
 teaching takes place on campus through lectures seminars and workshops. students meet representatives from public and private organizations who work actively with issues related to glocal challenges. the course devotes special interest to apply wil work integrated learning for sustainable development in collaboration with society. the course requires active participation in conversations and written work.
 continually work on further developing our programme offerings to meet societal and employment needs as well as the regional national and international demands that students place upon us.
 continue to make all programmes accessible through flexible teaching methods and varied educational approaches.
 further develop an international perspective with clearly defined segments devoted to internationalisation on all programmes.
 further develop our work with recognising and validating knowledge acquired outside the formal educational system.
 further develop models of partnership to meet the needs for knowledge exchange and continuing professional development among employees and professionals.
 develop ways of involving alumni in the universitys continuing development.
 students at all levels encounter current relevant societal challenges and interact with organisations and other actors during their time as students.
 students have plenty of opportunity to reflect upon and develop competence in sustainable development.
 programme students at all levels have the opportunity to continue their studies at the 2nd and 3rdcycle levels within the framework of the universitys two complete academic environments work integrated learning and production technology.
 ... and welcome akademus@hv.se
 now we simplify communication with akademus
 as of march 10 2023 you as a teacher can contact akademus@hv.se for all kinds of questions regarding support and development of your teaching.
 with that the address ims@hv.se ceases to apply but will of course work during a transition period so that we dont miss anything.
 the ict educational developers continue the popular dropin time monday  friday at 10  12 on zoom and in the akademus room but change the zoom room. the new zoom link is
 you can find all the information on how to contact us at ict support
 grade is a doctoral program grant to establish a national graduate school for digitaltechnologies in education  grade  planned to admit 12 doctoral students.
 one fundamental pillar of grade is the interdisciplinary approach. applied it curriculum studies education informatics and media technology are subject areas represented.
 grade will be conducted in cooperation between six swedish universities umeå university  university of gothenburg kth royal institute of technology mid swedenuniversity university of gävle and university west sweden.
 graded direct energy deposition in advanced alloys
 graduation ceremony bachelors programme
 graduation ceremony
 university west want to thank all graduating students and wish them all the best in the future by hosting a graduation ceremony. the ceremony is held in the end of every semester.
 the ceremony is framed by speeches music and is ended with a mingle with appetizers. graduating students and their teachers agree on which student that is representing the insitution. any diplomas and other matters are handled by the institution.
 all students are welcome even if they have not completed their studies or recieved their degree. family and friends are welcome in subject of availability. albertsalen have 499 seats.
 in june celebrations were held at university west. all the students who finished their studies were congratulated and celebrated in a two day graduation ceremony.
 we invited all graduates and their loved ones to participate in the ceremony sprinkled with song speeches and wishes for a great future.
 our goal is for all of our students to be prepared for an everchanging work life says acting vicechancellor jan theliander in his speech to the students. i hope you want to initiate and drive change in your future professions. and that you learn all your life. good luck in the future.
 approximately 1000 students were invited to the festivities both swedish and international and they are now taking their first steps into work life. with them they bring a wide range of new needed skills.
 graduations ceremony masters programme
 the graduation ceremony at university west occurs in early summer. the ceremony  with speech and music small reception and hors doeuvres  are for all students who have studied a masters programme at university west.
 the ceremony is for students who has completed a masters programme at university west. if you have any questions regarding the ceremony please contact event@hv.se.
 university west in collaboration with silversmith annika bohlin has developed a master degree ring on the same theme as the university regalia tree of knowledge. the ring is made of silver and is decorated with a branch in 18k gold. the students are responsible for ordering and paying for the ring themselves. the form to order this is sent together with the diploma.
 gio responsibility and tasks
 provide feedback on draft proposals
 provide templates and support for legal project agreements
 head of grants and innovation office
 staff grants and innovation office
 administrative officer                        international collaboration coordinator
 green and sustainable campus
 this is how we describe a green  sustainable campus.
 green and sustainable campus  one of the impact targets in the campus development
 we have a green campus both when it comes to sustainability and access to greenery vegetation and pleasant recreational environments. in the campus area there are plenty of green spaces in which to study work and spend time in both indoors and out. our campus is economically socially and environmentally sustainable we consume and produce energy in smart ways and take an innovative considered approach to the use of resources and materials.
 the project focuses on integrating greenery and building structure to improve urban environments supported by visualization tools to facilitate understanding and collaboration among various stakeholders.
 reaching a tipping point  perioperative nurse managers narratives about reasons for leaving their employment  a qualitative study.
 i stay  swedish specialist nurses in the perioperative context and their reasons to stay at their workplace
 a pathway towards reconciliation and wellbeing  a spouses experiences of living with a partner diagnosed with earlyonset dementia
 patients variations of reflection about and understanding of longterm illness  impact of illness perception on trust in oneself or others
 tactile massage as a nursing intervention in child and adolescent psychiatry  nurses experiences
 learning to fly with broken wings  forcing a reappraisal of time and space.
 feeling rejected or invited  experiences of persons seeking care advice at the swedish healthcare direct organization
 nursing students perspectives on the patient and the impact of the nursing culture  a metasynthesis
 suffering and suffering with the other  the perspective of perioperative nurse leaders
 the perioperative dialogue  holistic nursing in practice
 the common world  the responsibility of the face  here i am
 nurses perspective of the perioperative dialogue
 the nurse has time for me  the perioperative dialogue from the perspective of patients
 the common world  a model of the perioperative dialogue its ethos and characteristic structural caring principles
 managerial challenges faced by swedish nurse managers in perioperative settings  a qualitative study
 nurse managers in perioperative settings and their reasons for remaining in their jobs  a qualitative study
 interacting with parents in sweden who hesitate or refrain from vaccinating their child
 international nursing  caring in nursing leadership  a metaethnography from the nurse leaders perspective.
 i am quitting my job  specialist nurses in perioperative context and their experiences of the process and reasons to quit their job
 strategies for healthcare professionals to facilitate patient illness understanding.
 the meaning of personcentred care in the perioperative nursing context from the patients perspective  an integrative review
 growing as a human being  obese adolescents experiences of the changing body
 experiences of spirituality and spiritual values in the context of nursing  an integrative review
 being altered by the unexpected  understanding the perioperative patients experience
 patients and nurses experiences of the perioperative dialogue  two grounded theory studies
 meanings of suffering from the perspective of nurse leaders
 the perioperative dialogue  coherence in a continuous whole
 the expression of caring within the perioperative dialogue  a hermeneutic study
 what constitutes caring in the perioperative culture from the perspective of nurse leaders?
 a source of strength  nurses perspective of the perioperative dialogue.
 the development of caring in the perioperative culture  nurse leaders perspective on the struggle to retain sight of the patient
 guidance for foreign study merits
 special study guidance for you who lives in sweden that have a foreign education and  or academic studies.
 through the guidance meetings you can find out what opportunities that are available for you with foreign qualifications in the swedish education system.
 book an appointment
 for an indepth more detailed counselling you are welcome to book an appointment. during the appointment we will together look at what opportunities you have to further studies based on your previous merits you can ask us study and work related questions. counselling is offered in swedish and english. we have a duty of confidentiality in our meetings with you and you will first and foremost meet the study counsellor who specifies on people with foreign merits.
 to book an appointment please contact servicecenter.
 preparations for an appointment
 the study and career counsellors job is to ask questions that leads to reflection and that can help you make decisions. to prepare for an appointment with us think through what you want to discuss and bring relevant documents for example documentation about your previous education. it can be programmes andor courses from your home country andor sweden.
 we may handle personal data
 when you contact the student and career counselling we may require some personal data from you for example personal id number notes or records about what type of support you need etc. all data that can be linked to your person is handled in accordance with the general data protection regulation gdpr.
 read more about gdpr and how we handle your personal data at university west or visit the official eu commision gdpr website.
 guidelines for safety when working on and in electric vehicles parttime campus rse100
 the course presents the electrical safety guidelines required for work on and in electric vehicles. the course focuses on the creation of a riskfree environment with electric drive systems electrical safety maintenance of electrical installations and provides knowledge about the chemical risks that the use of batteries can entail.
 hur fungerar canvas inkorg och microsoft outlook studentmail?
 hybrid classrooms
 guides to hybrid classrooms
 here you will find guides and instructions for the hybrid classroom.
 if you have questions about the hybrid classrooms or want to book an introduction contact the ict educational developers at akademus. if you want to book startup assistance contact servicecenter@hv.se three working days in advance.
 what information do i need to connect to the canvas course zoom room?
 how do i share my screen?
 how do i handle the microphones?
 how do i handle the webcams?
 how do i show participants without webcam on the screens?
 how do i use the chat?
 how do i turn off the projector during the lesson?
 how do i avoid a participant appearing large on the main screen?
 how do i use breakout rooms?
 how do i end the meeting?
 how do i use the classroom without digital participants?
 before you go to the hybrid classroom you should have the following information written down to be able to connect to zoom via the hybrid classrooms touch panel. this means that you should not connect to the courses zoom room on your own computer.
 to connect to the courses zoom room in the hybrid classroom you need to know
 the meeting id passcode and host key are the same throughout the course. how to find them
 go to the course page on canvas.
 scroll down to the module the course zoom room. write down the zoom rooms host key.
 enter the courses zoom room by clicking on the link.
 inside the zoom room click on the green shield in the upper left corner.
 write down the meeting id and passcode.
 start all screens in the classroom with the control panel located on the wall or table.
 connect to zoom on the touch panel which is located at the front of the classroom. do not use your own computer to connect.
 tap join on the touch panel.
 enter meeting id and if necessary passcode.
 to host the meeting tap participants claim host.
 enter the host key. if you do not find the claim host button you are already host in the meeting.
 when you connect your laptop with the hdmi cable the sharing of your screen starts automatically. the image on your screen is displayed both in the room and in zoom. if you share content with audio it will be heard automatically in zoom.
 the microphones are recessed into the ceiling. to turn them off click mute on the touch panel. then the lights on the microphones in the ceiling light up red.
 to control how the microphones in the room are directed use the control panel on the wall or table. you can choose to point the ceiling microphones at the teacher. then the microphones in the ceiling light up green. if you choose to point them at the entire room it will glow blue instead.
 there are fixed webcams in the classroom. the teachers camera is located between the two screens in the back of the room. the audience camera is placed in front of the board and shows the participants. it is useful for discussions or for digital participants to get an idea of how many and which people are present.
 to control the webcams open the camera control menu. the teacher camera has preset views for example to display a whiteboard or teacher.
 to switch active camera open the switch camera menu. you can view both cameras in the meeting at the same time with multicamera mode.
 digital participants without a webcam or profile picture are not displayed. this makes it difficult to know who is participating digitally but go to participants click on more and then show nonvideo participants. then the participants are displayed as a black box with names.
 in a hybrid classroom equipped with a projector you can easily turn it off if you want to use the entire whiteboard during your teaching.
 to avoid this you can switch the content on the screens. press the växla skärm button to toggle content between the main screen and the side screen. this is useful if you are not sharing any content and want to show all digital participants in gallery view on the main screen.
 students can use the chat as in a regular meeting. to reply to the chat do so on the touch panel under chat. another alternative is to answer orally so that even participants on site can hear the answer to the question.
 the online students can be divided into groups called breakout rooms. when the breakout room has been started the groups conversations are not heard in the hybrid classroom and they cannot hear what is being said in the hybrid classroom. the film shows how breakout rooms is started and how the group division is done either automatically manually or that the students themselves choose a group.
 always end the zoom meeting with leave  end and select end meeting for all. then all participants will be automatically disconnected from the meeting. then turn off the screens on the control panel.
 you can easily use the classroom without digital participants. your shared content appears on all classroom screens. follow the instructions below.
 press on to start the screens.
 insert the hdmi cable to display the content on the screens  projector in the classroom.
 press off to turn off screens.
 on this page we have guides to our computer programs and systems.
 wifi  wireless network
 eduroam  installation guide for android
 eduroam  installation guide for iphone
 eduroam  installation guide for google cromebook
 eduroam  installation guide for osx mac
 eduroam  installation guide for windows pc
 hvguest  installation guide for all devices
 office 365
 email  the first time you log in  settings
 email  synchronize to smartphone  android
 email  synchronize to smartphone  iphone
 teams
 install software on a private computer
 microsoft office  install office 365  proplus
 senior advisor strategic internationalisation
 attitudes towards fairtrade principles and environmental views among the inhabitants of a rural swedish town
 consumer attitudes to ethically labelled products
 the effect of environmental information on professional purchasers preference for food products
 predictors of purchase of ecolabelled food products  a panel study
 values and willingnesstopay for sustainabilitycertified mobile phones
 the relationship between mindbody dualism and personal values
 an examination of swedish human resource management students beliefs about what work should ideally be like
 personality traits and personal values  a replication with a swedish sample
 the impact of personality traits values and abilities on the view of uniqueness of consciousness
 exploring the perception and use of environmental information in the food system
 the impact of environmental information on professional purchasers choice of products
 values and eco and fairtrade labelled products
 studentcounsellor for programmes and courses in teaching
 h2jet  development of key components for hydrogenpowered aircraft engines
 hydrogen has been identified as one of the fuels of the future for aviation.gkn aerospace together with six partners is investing in the development of key components for hydrogenpowered aircraft engines. university west will contribute expert knowledge in metallurgy.
 europes aviation industry has clear targets for achieving net zero emissions by 2050. the technologies that are expected to provide the greatest benefit to the climate are new aircraft powered by liquid hydrogen in gas turbines. the h2jet project will accelerate this development.
 gkn aerospace estimates that 5090 of todays carbon dioxide emissions from aviation can be eliminated by hydrogen aviation which would mean at least 500 million tonnes per year globally. forecasts for travel volumes when hydrogen flights may become available however make it likely that the emission reductions may rather be around 10003000 million tonnes per year.
 the swedish energy agency supports the project with approximately sek 15 million and a total of sek 24 million is invested. in addition to gkn aerospace chalmers university of technology lund university the royal institute of technology university west rise and oxeon smf are participating. the project participants will develop technical solutions for three important subsystems for hydrogenpowered aircraft engines for civilian mediumrange aircraft.
 university west will contribute with expert knowledge in metallurgy. since hydrogen can have embrittling effects on various metals it will be critical to have full control of aircraft engine parts that will be exposed to hydrogen in the future comments robert pederson professor of materials engineering.
 hydrogen has been pointed out as one of the fuels of the future for aviation. the aircraft manufacturer airbus has launched that it intends to develop three concept aircraft all of which are based on hydrogen technology by 2035.
 h2ram  h2 embrittlement of rocket engine components made with am powder bed
 this project aims to increase understanding of how and why hydrogen embrittlement and its various mechanisms occur.
 implementation of additive manufacturing am with laser and powder bed technology lbpbf of the nibased superalloy alloy718 for the manufacture of rocket engine components provides benefits through reduced material consumption and reduced costs. difficulties with the implementation of am are often linked to high demands on material properties and quality. furthermore the hydrogen environment to which the rocket engine components are exposed risks greatly reducing their functionality. hydrogen can significantly shorten the life of critical components of the rocket engine via various types of embrittlement mechanisms which partly depend on the microstructure of the material.
 kaunas university of technology lithuania
 hackit  a network for educational institutions
 the hackit education project aims to create a sustainable network of educational institutions that operate both online and irl in countries and regions with different cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds.
 the objectives of hackit project seek
 to create a sustainable network of educational institutions operating both online and facetoface in regions with different cultural as well as socioeconomic backgrounds for exchanging existing practices expertise and increasing virtual mobility of teachers and students.
 to develop a sustainable ict based methodology built on innovative tl methods pedagogical approaches digital literacy and tools that can be applied in different disciplines subjectscourses.
 to pilot the sustainable ict based methodology learning materials and scenarios with recommendations in different learning settings within different study fieldsareas and multicultural settings e.g. engineeing business and economics computing humanities arts mathematical physical social and technological sciences and evaluate the level of efficiency of different pedagogies and tools in engaging students in active learning process.
 to disseminate project outcomes and tangible outputs and offer recommendations for further adaptability and use of the open access methodology.
 jansson håkan. 2013. bakk or bakvörður  on loans and induced linguistic innovations in icelandic football lexis. i bergh gunnar rhonwen bowen  mats mobärg red. language football  and all that jazz. a festschrift for sölve ohlander. gothenburg studies in english acta universitatis gothoburgensis. göteborg göteborgs universitet. s.157168.
 carlund carina sofie johansson kokkinakis judy ribeck håkan jansson  julia prentice. 2012. an academic word list for swedish  a support for language learners in higher education. proceedings of the sltc 2012 workshop on nlp for call. linköping electronic conference proceedings 802027. tillgänglig elektroniskt
 hannesdottir anna helga aldís sigurðardóttir håkan jansson halldóra jónsdóttir lars trapjensen  þórdís úlfarsdóttir. 2008. islexan icelandicscandinavian multilingual online dictionary. proceedings of the xiii euralex international congress barcelona 1519 july 2008. tillgänglig elektroniskt
 work 2021. work wellbeing and health. virtuell konferens om arbetsliv och hälsa. framlagt paper the challenges of the covid19 crisis and the pillars of mindful leadership. konferensen anordnades av university of turku finland.
 international conference 2016. managing interpersonal emotion dynamic in caregiving relationship application for psychotherapy and early education. psykologiska institutionen stockholms universitet 18 november 2016. en av sex inbjudna talare. konferensbidrag mindfulness as a tool to enhance caregiving relationships nilsson 2016.
 mindfulness workshop  definition of mindfulness 2013 institutionen för litteratur idé historia och religion göteborgs universitet anordnade 2013 en workshop med inbjudna forskare med intresse för mindfulness. key note kirk warren brown university of virginia.
 nilsson h. 2022. social worker as an actionoriented sociotherapist. an existential health discourse. journal of religion  spirituality in social work social thought doi 10.108015426432.2022.2103487.
 nilsson h. 2022. the fourdimensional model of mindful sustainable aging a holistic alternative. journal of religion spirituality  aging doi 10.108015528030.2022.2083743.
 nilsson h. 2022. taking a mindful run with murakami a hermeneutic phenomenological approach. contemporary buddhism doi 10.108014639947.2022.2043038.
 nilsson h. 2021. spiritual selfcare management for nursing professionals a holistic approach. journal of holistic nursing. doi10.117708980101211034341.
 nilsson h. kazemi a. 2021. mindful human resource management combining buddhist principles of enlightenment with diversity management. international journal of management concept and philosophy 142 114134.
 nilsson h. 2021. mindfulness as a tool for adhd drivers a comparative study of higher levels of selfawareness. journal of disability  religion 252 225238.
 nilsson h. 2018. existential social work and the quest for existential meaning and wellbeing a conceptual framework journal of religion  spirituality in social work 371 6476.
 nilsson h. 2017. cultivating mindfulness through the practice of iaid?. contemporary buddhism 181 3746.
 nilsson h. 2016. socioexistential mindfulness bringing empathy and compassion into health care practice. spirituality in clinical practice 31 2231.
 nilsson h. kazemi a. 2016. mindfulness therapies and assessment scales a brief review. international journal of psychological studies 81 1119.
 nilsson h. kazemi a. 2016. reconciling and thematizing definitions of mindfulness the big five of mindfulness. review of general psychology 202 183193.
 nilsson h. kazemi a. 2016. from buddhist sati to western mindfulness practice a contextual analysis journal of religion  spirituality in social work 3512 723.
 nilsson h. bülow p. kazemi a. 2015. mindful sustainable aging advancing a comprehensive approach to the challenges and opportunities of old age. europes journal of psychology 113 494508.
 nilsson h. 2014. a fourdimensional model of mindfulness and its implications for health. psychology of religion and spirituality 62 162174.
 nilsson h. 2013. how mindfulness becomes mindlessness  a hermeneutical approach. asian journal of humanities and social studies 14 187196.
 occupational balance and associated factors among students during higher education within healthcare and social work in sweden  a multicentre repeated crosssectional study
 salutary factors and hospital work environments a qualitative descriptive study of nurses in sweden
 the level of sense of coherence among swedish nursing staff
 learning through reflection  the portfolio method as a tool to promote workintegrated learning in higher education
 the workintegrated learning combined with the portfolio method  a pedagogical strategy and tool in nursing education for developing professional competence
 the portfolio method as management support for patients with major depression
 development and psychometric test of the salutogenic survey on sustainable working life for nurses  identifying resistance resources against stress
 healthpromoting factors among students in higher education within health care and social work  a crosssectional analysis of baseline data in a multicentre longitudinal study
 healthpromoting factors in higher education for a sustainable working life  protocol for a multicenter longitudinal study
 experiences of major depression  individuals perspectiveson the ability to understand and handle the illness
 håkan wants to make it easier for industry to identify material defects
 congratulations on your appointment as professor håkan
 thanks it feels great its not completely new since ive been a visitor professor at university west since 2020 and before that i was associate professor at chalmers university of technology.
 what is nondestructive testing?
 its a testing process used to inspect components for defects and other anomalies without any impact on their functionality or quality. with the help of various techniques such as ultrasound xray and eddy current testing you can find cracks and other defects in metals and simultaneously find out what kind of defect it is how big it is and where it is.
 nondestructive testing ndt is used in the nuclear power industry and the aviation and space industries where quality requirements are extremely high. small cracks in metal can grow over time and may have disastrous consequences if they appear in nuclear power plant pipes or an airplane engines turbine blades for instance.
 the same techniques can be useful in many different industries such as manufacturing industries that invest in additive manufacturing and other new manufacturing methods. this becomes increasingly important as the ability to compete in the production system of the future will largely be qualitybased. at university west were developing ndt by applying simulation models and tools to ensure product quality in additive manufacturing using various metal materials and components based on composites.
 when i took a leave of absence from chalmers to try to implement our developed simulation tools in the inspection industry i was deeply impressed by the competence and craftmanship that testing staff represent. that made me want to develop our simulation tools further to be able to facilitate their work and give a deeper understanding for the techniques they apply. im convinced that the experiencefounded knowledge base and the conclusions we as specialists come to based on it cannot be fully replaced by machine learning and ai.
 what attracted you to university west?
 what are you mainly focussing on now?
 were developing new courses in nondestructive testing both for our masters 120 credits programme in manufacture technology and for professionals who want to develop their skills. the demand for knowledge in this area is great.
 contact håkan wirdelius
 read more about nondestructive testing
 the products we all produce or use and the services we provide or benefit from are getting increasingly automated processes from the factory to the home. however what we usually miss are the societal environmental and economic impacts of automation and how it can affect goals related to sustainable development. where lies the balance between an automated world and a sustainable one? the aim of the sustainable automation course is to therefore to develop understanding vision and knowledge of the sustainability features and elements in each automation project. it also introduces how an automation project should be carried out considering the sustainability features from planning to implementation.
 the course gives an introduction to sustainability. furthermore it covers sustainability aspects in automation projects as well as how sustainability and industry 4.0 are related. it also includes product lifecycle management plm.
 the course format campus or distance can vary. the form is stated when the course being announced. the current courses can be found here.
 dunlosky j. et al. 2013. improving students learning with effective learning techniques promising directions from cognitive and educational psychology. psychological science in the public interest. 141 458. i denna artikel beskrivs tio evidensbaserade tekniker för undervisning.
 ith200
 buss
 bil med minst 2 personer carpooling
 the course is aimed at students who want basic knowledge about global health and nursing in relation to the current global work with the uns sustainability goals. human rights global nursing and determinants of health are examples of topics in the course. the students will also do a short field study as well as work with a facultative global health challenge.
 challenges to achieving a common outlook primary care managers experiences of promoting personcentred care in primary care contextulla fredriksson larsson pia alsén ulla h graneheim högskolan väst
 hammar nordic accommodation
 trollhättans private housing companyhammar nordic has multiple apartment buildings where you have the chance to be placed. the buildings include järnvägsgatan 17 and lasarettsvägen 3 5. buildings are subject to change due to availability.
 below you will find more information about the description of the hammar nordic student apartments payment and termination information.
 studio apartments bedroom and kitchen are in the same room with a separate bathroom. you have the possibility of sharing this space with another student. it will be stated in your offer.
 2 rooms and a kitchen apartments 1 bedroom separate living room and kitchen with one bathroom. the living room and kitchen are in an open plan.remember if you are placed in this type of apartment you will be sharing a bedroom with another student.
 rent is estimated to be between 3200sek9000sek and can change yearly.
 hammar nordic is unable to accept credit card or cash payments. only bank transfers are accepted. when students have arrived to sweden they can make the payments in an exchange office. in the payment instructions the students have received there is information on how to proceed. if the payment is made through wester union the student must email the receipt with the reference number to hammar nordic.
 rent is always paid in advance no later than the last day of the month before
 the termination period is 3 months.
 computer vision.
 head of library
 staff member at study and academic support library and educational development.
 head of study and academic support library and educational development and thus responsible for the units content with the support of the heads of departments. operational responsibility for the näktergalen project and organizationally responsible for the center for sustainability.
 in response to the need to mitigate threats arising from outsourcing activities and the exposure of sensitive data more companies are expressing interest in cultivating inhouse expertise. developing nhouse competency into cyber risk assessment is becoming significant advantage for these organizations.
 this course introduces cybersecurity risk analysis and assessment as a foundation for cybersecurity protection mechanisms. comprehensive cybersecurity assessment techniques are practiced to learn about means to protect industrial infrastructure assets. cybersecurity management is emphasized through processes for assessing vulnerabilities and prioritizing remedial actions to reduce cyber risk.
 three years of higher education bachelor level in engineering  technology bachelor degree corresponding to 180cp including at least 2.5 cp credits in cybersecurity or equivalent. alternatively relevant professional work experience.
 hardface coatings can be produced using cobaltfree materials
 currently cobaltbased materials are often used in various industries such as mining equipment paper and wood industries and cutting and milling tools where a hard surface is required. due to cobalt being a limited resource extracted under questionable conditions the industry is seeking alternatives. moreover 70 of the worlds cobalt reserves are in the congo where reports of child labor and health issues during extraction have surfaced.
 recently kaveh torkashvand presented his doctoral thesis with new findings in this area. kaveh has investigated how well three alternative cobaltleanfree composites perform compared to a traditional tungstencobalt alloy.
 alternative materials with superior performance
 kaveh has also examined how two forms of thermal spraying hvof and hvaf can be used to deposit this class of coating materials. currently hvof technology is almost exclusively used in the industry while hvaf is relatively new to the industry.
 my experiments show that there are several advantages to using hvaf for processing this type of material. the technology allows the use of fine powder resulting in denser coatings paving the way for producing thinner coatings and as a result reducing material usage.
 faster and more energy efficient process
 additional benefits include the fact that hvaf can significantly expedite the coating process while using less energy and subsequently becoming a more costeffective technique compared to hvof.
 kavehs study demonstrates how various factors can influence the properties of the resulting coating. the chemical composition and powder size are two important considerations. moreover there are several ways to adjust the spraying process to precisely create the properties that the surface coating needs to perform well under various wear conditions.
 combating the wear phenomenon is a challenge that various industrial sectors are facing. tool manufacturers as well as the wood paper mining and automotive industries are just a few examples where coatings deposited by hvaf technology can be of interest.
 brake disks can have a longer service life
 an example is brake disks for cars which are currently mostly made of cast iron. their lifespan is short and a massive amount of debris is released into the environment. by coating brake disks with a cofree hardface coating using hvaf technology dust emissions would be significantly reduced and the lifespan can be dramatically increased.
 kaveh emphasizes that cobaltfree composites are already available on the market and industries can relatively easily replace the harmful tungstencobalt composites.
 implementing hvaf technology in industries may take time but they can still produce cobaltfree coatings with their existing deposition technology.
 read more in kaveh torkashvands doctoral thesis towards more sustainable approaches for protecting surfaces against wear
 contact kaveh torkashvand phd in production engineering. email kaveh.torkashvand@hv.se. phone 076552 48 03
 kaveh has compared the three cobaltfree composites nimocrfeco fenicrmocu and fecral with the traditionally used tungstencobalt composite wccocr.
 hvof high velocity oxyfuel and hvaf high velocity airfuel are two different techniques in thermal spraying. powder is melted as it passes through a highspeed flame using compressed air where the powder melts and is then propelled towards the component to be coated. in hvof oxygen from oxygen tanks is used while regular air is used in hvaf. different fuels are used in the two techniques which means they provide different temperatures hvof about 1500  3000c and hvaf below 1500c.
 he takes am one step closer to the aviation industry goals
 karthikeyans doctoral thesis demonstrates among other things how the need for postprocessing of ammanufactured components can be reduced which saves both material and time. photo university west.
 karthikeyan presented his doctoral dissertation in the end of may focusing on one of the am technologies called electron beam powder bed fusion pfbeb for titanium alloys.
 am has many advantages
 this manufacturing technology is highly interesting for certain components. it enables reduced material consumption lowers costs and in the long term decreases environmental impact. additionally the technology opens new possibilities for manufacturing more complex geometries than what is possible with conventional methods like casting and forging explains karthikeyan.
 similar to the surface roughness the defects in the bulk of the am components can be detrimental to fatigue life.
 new postbuildheat treatment
 the ambuilt components are typically subjected to postbuildheat treatments hot isostatic pressing. the current postbuildheat treatment method is developed for conventional manufacturing techniques. the method is not optimal for am manufacturing as it negatively affects the static strength.
 i have investigated a new method tailored for am manufacturing. this method uses a lower temperature providing several advantages the titanium alloy does not lose static strength and the fatigue properties are comparable to the standard postbuildheat treatment method.
 for the aviation industry to use the new method after am manufacturing it must be standardized according to the industrys safety and quality criteria.
 once a standard is in place the industry can more efficiently use am technology to manufacture more components. the technology is also interesting for other applications such as the medical technology industry that produces implants.
 aims to reduce the need for postprocessing
 by reducing postbuildmachining depth from about 2 mm to 1 mm material and time are saved in manufacturing. if components can also be built fully finished in an am process without requiring postprocessing then we can truly claim to have created a sustainable manufacturing method. today we talk about achieving nearnetshape but the goal should be to achieve netshape says karthikeyan.
 in addition to teaching i look forward to working with more am processes and more materials with a focus on the fatigue properties of materials and how we ensure quality with the help of ai.
 read karthikeyans dissertation microstructure and mechanical properties of ti6al4v manufactured by electron beam powder bed fusion
 health promoting integration
 the large number of refugee migrants settling in sweden faces many challenges to integrate into the new society in terms of language norms culture rules and laws.
 having fled war and oppressions many people suffer from various forms of trauma. studies indicate that migrants and especially refugees becomes more segregated and excluded in the new country with lower education and higher unemployment. in connection these migrant groups display a significantly lower health status. integration and inclusion in the society is therefore the most important factor for the migrants to achieve a more positive health status and brighter future in the new society.
 uddevalla municipality actively work to improve public health status among all its inhabitants. for this reason the municipality would like to develop models and approaches suitable for the newly arrived people in the local society. this project hence aims to study and develop suitable tools that the municipality can apply to achieve its goals of health promoting integration
 helen ansah came all the way from the hot sun of ghana to the slightly colder sweden to study it and management.
 one of the main reasons helen chose to apply for university west was because she was interested in our master in it and management. helen had a bachelor of science in computer science before but had a desire to advance her knowledge further.
 i worked in the administration department of a bank for 4 years. but it was hard to get an it related job. thats why i still had the desire to advance my knowledge in it.
 helen finds the courses to be well balanced with both theoretical and practical elements and says that the method of workintegrated learning which the programme is based on is a good way to also gain practical experience.
 workintegrated learning creates opportunities for me as a student to test the theoretical knowledge i have gained in class in practice which i believe makes learning easier. the programme also has very qualified lecturers helen says.
 besides the programme helen says she enjoys the campus life here in trollhättan very much. the campus is located in the city center which makes it easy to access everything.
 there is peace order and calm everywhere. the environment is so beautiful and well preserved. shops are close to the apartments and the people are kind. being here in trollhätan feels like home.
 when shes not studying helen often goes for a walk around the town meets up with friends and takes part in the student café every tuesday where students can gather to eat sweets drink coffee and learn swedish. helen says she really loves fika not just because she gets to enjoy delicious food but also because she gets to interact with lots of people with different backgrounds.
 as for the future helen has big plans and wants to gain as much knowledge as possible.
 i want to gain much more knowledge in it enhance my skills and fit into the global job market. its going to be hard but i believe with the workintegrated learning in this programme it will be possible.
 staff member at service  it vice chancellors office.
 financial support for the department administration and student services and library
 support calculations regarding applications for external project funding
 helena toth learning specialist global volvo car academy
 avhandlingen i sin helhet digital work  coping with contradictions in changing healthcare.
 my career in work integrated learning wil started during 1996 at the central university of technology free state cut in bloemfontein south africa when i was appointed as coordinator wil at cut. it provided the ideal opportunity to be involved with my main interests namely education and economics and to build on my qualifications already obtained in these fields which were an honours degree in economics and higher education diploma at the time. my involvement with wil included extensive liaison with commerce industry and the public sector ever since as well as to develop and implement wil programmes at cut in various faculties.
 member of the universities south africa world of work strategy group
 national facilitator for universities south africa to find solutions for wil resulting from the covid19 pandemic
 chairperson of  the south african technology network work integrated learning task team
 scientific committee member for the annual international education and new developments conference
 senior reviewer for international education conferences of the international academic forum
 chairperson of the wil  skills development committee of the central university of technology free state
 publications recent
 jacobs h.s. and teise. v.n. 2014 the roles of workintegrated learning in achieving critical crossfield outcomes in a hospitality management programme. journal for new generation sciences jngs 12189102.
 jacobs. h. 2015 determining best practice from graduate employability a work integrated learning case study in hospitality management. the african journal for workbased learning 2015314154.
 jacobs h. 2015 teaching for employability key concepts and best practice principles. end 2015 international conference on education and new developments porto portugal 2729 june 2015.
 jacobs h.  strydom a. 2018 an institutional strategy template to optimally enhance the employability of students through work integrated learning. end 2018 international conference on education and new developments budapest hungary 2325 june 2018.
 support technician
 i work with supporting teachers in making educational content be it either as sound or images moving or still. i also work with streaming events and conferenses.
 framework agreements and calloff
 over 10 representatives from the usa england and other european countries were present presenting various aspects of using yoga as a tool to improve the lives of incarcerated individuals.
 i focused on describing the scientific evidence available today on how yoga affects the behavior mental health and character of individuals with mental illness and criminal behavior says nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry at university west in sweden.
 positive effects
 yoga has the capacity to improve responsibility and selfcontrol. we see increased character maturity in those who practice yoga regularly that we do not otherwise see in people in prison or in forensic psychiatric settings.
 we also measure aggressive behavior directed to self or to others antisocial behavior different aspects of psychological distress changes in emotional states attention and impulse control. from all these aspects we have measured a significant improvement specifically linked to yoga.
 strong commitment
 nóra kerekes work has not only received international attention but has also demonstrated the potential of using yoga as a tool for rehabilitation and improving the quality of life for incarcerated individuals and individuals suffering from psychiatric diagnoses.
 nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry at university west sweden nora.kerekes@hv.se  46739013403
 one of the updates for the autumn canvas courses is that hidden grading will become the default for assignment submissions. teaching staff have long desired for the grading of assignment submissions to be automatically hidden and now the change is here
 in the autumn courses there will no longer be a need to manually change from automatically grade posting policy to manually grade posting policy for each individual assignment. manually grade posting policy will be enabled from the beginning.
 however we must raise a small cautionary note regarding this feature and quizzes this will affect selfgrading quizzes and students will not be able to see their results with manually grade posting policy. if the results need to be released immediately the quiz must first be changed to automatically grade posting policy.
 high thermal inertia solar cavity receiver development
 the industry is consolidating their interest in decarbonizing their energy sources. decarbonization in terms of electricity has come a long way with the integration of vast solar and wind generation capacity. however the thermal needs of the industry are still relying highly on fossil fuels.
 the industrial demand for heat represents 37  of the total energy consumption worldwide yet only 9 of it is met with renewable energy. solar csp is a great and one of the few alternatives to generate renewable high temperature heat but the csp industry needs to accommodate to the specific needs of this industry.
 an advanced high thermal inertia dome cavity solar receiver will be developed for medium and high temperature process heat applications and green hydrogen production with soec electrolysers and thermo catalytic process. such receiver is conceived to address the main operational problems of the stateoftheart alternative systems derived from their high thermal stress working conditions.
 the resulting prototype will form the basis for an easy to industrialize flexible and safe to operate system optimized from a costperformance standpoint. optical heat transfer structural and material design aspects of the unique receiver will be thoroughly evaluated and the development and experimental demonstration will be reported.
 higher education pedagogy in english
 university west has an agreement with the pil unit at the university of gothenburg where they offer spots to hv employees who only speak english. we have a limited number of spots in pils courses each year and they are distributed on a firstcome firstserved basis.
 the courses for which we have an agreement are
 teaching and learning in higher education 1 basic course pil101
 teaching and learning in higher education 2 subject field pedagogy pil102
 teaching and learning in higher education 3 applied analysis pil103
 the application and admission to courses offered by the pil unit are handled through university west. we then inform pil about the individuals who have been admitted and instructions for the ongoing processes and course structure are subsequently sent out by pil.
 the courses for the spring of 2024 are already fully enrolled.
 application for autumn 2024
 the application for autumn 2024 courses is open and you can apply until april 19th. please note that we have a limited number of seats for pils courses and they are allocated on a firstcome firstserved basis.
 general information about pils courses in teaching and learning in higher education.
 higher education year 2040?2
 under the heading digital futures kth stockholm university och rise arrange a webinar series where questions and future visions are discussed.
 digital futures for education is a new series of conversations and events that bring together key actors from academia civil society and the private and public sectors. its mission is to provide a colloquial space for discussion and reflection on the digital transformation in education and the role of universities in todays complex societies. the goal is also to build a community with key national and international educational actors.
 may 25 at 1230 p.m. issues such as the university of the future and how todays activities are affected by visions about the future and who governs our visions for the future are discussed.
 sign up for the webinar
 higher education year 2040?22
 hightlight  highstrength steel in a lightweight design with weldingbased additive manufacturing
 waam wire arc additive manufacturing is a manufacturing method that combines traditional welding with additive manufacturing.
 the additive process am is based on a metal wire being fed by a power source which then melts the metal wire onto a base plate. this is done along a defined robot path and the result is an object consisting of layers upon layers of applied molten wire. smart design for the weight reduction of constructions is advantageously carried out through topology optimization which means that materials are concentrated to the most critical parts of the object. this is done with the primary intention of minimizing material usage as well as reducing weight without affecting the strength of the object. topologyoptimized objects normally result in complicated geometries which traditional manufacturing methods have difficulty in producing. this results in that manufacturing methods with higher geometrical flexibility such as waam are better suited.
 the perceived power and powerlessness in school health nurses mental health promotion practices  a synthesis of qualitative studies
 the evidenced effects of early childhood interventions to promote mental health and parenting in the nordic countries  a systematic review
 are universal measures sufficient in reducing child poverty in the nordic countries?  an analysis of policies and political commitments
 determinants of nonresponse in a longitudinal study of participants in the women and alcohol in gothenburg project
 assessing and promoting responsive interaction between parents and children  a qualitative study of the experiences of child health care nurses in sweden.
 experiences of family violence and parental unavailability in childhood in relation to parental socioeconomic position and psychological problems  a cohort study of young swedish women 19902013.
 school connectedness and adult depressiveness longitudinal study of the northern swedish cohort
 relations and interrelations between sense of coherence socioeconomic status and health behaviour  a systematic review
 relative deprivation in the nordic countrieschild mental health problems in relation to parental financial stress
 young peoples experience of promoting aspects for mental wellbeing
 promoting salutogenic capacity in health professionals
 poor school connectedness in adolescence and adulthood depressiveness  a longitudinal theorydriven study from the northern sweden cohort
 relative wellbeing of women maltreated as children
 to live not only survive  an ongoing endeavor  resilience of adult swedish women abused as children.
 parents socioeconomic position psychological problems and emotional neglect in childhood
 economic poverty among children and adolescents in the nordic countries
 associations between parents subjective time pressure and mental health problems among children in the nordic countries  a population based study
 hipercoat
 nextgeneration high performance tribological coatings for industrial applications
 hipercoat aims to develop nextgeneration coatings to extend performance and durability of industrial components that experience excessive wear during routine operation. it seeks to do so by first establishing a fundamental understanding of coating processmicrostructureperformance relationships in emergent highvelocity air fuel hvaf and suspension plasma spray sps techniques and exploiting the ensuing knowledge to suitably tailor the coating properties. the complementary experience and expertise of a carefully chosen network of industrial partners is to be utilized through coproduction to accomplish the above and therebyaddress the incessant industrial demand for coatings with superior tribological  performance in harsh operating environments. although three distinct applications ranging from gas turbine components to parts of wood chipping equipment and doctor blades have been chosen to demonstrate efficacy of developed hvaf andsps coatings through field trials the outcome will be of immediate interest to many other swedish industries.
 historia
 covid19 och corona
 flixbus f.d. swebus
 62 professorer
 olof blomqvist
 rachel carson tyst vår
 holidays around the globe event
 you are welcome to our holidays around the globe event we would like to have a small christmas celebration with all students that are interested in going abroad or that come from abroad. with this event we at the international office and all departmental coordinators would also like to say goodbye and be accessible for our exchange students that are leaving to go back home in december or january.
 what is it?
 we will have a typical swedish lucia tåg a fun quiz games about holiday traditions around the globe information for students about going abroad or going back home. we will collaborate with the event cu@4 so you can get a free fika from the café and play board games. additionally the international office will provide glögg and pepparkakor.
 who can join?
 everyone at university west.
 a special invitation goes to students that are interested in going abroad during their studies and to exchange students that are currently here at university west from abroad.
 when and where?
 on 12th of december at 1600 in the central café in building c. we will also be available for you in the entrance area in front of the service center during the entire day for questions. the event is estimated to be around 2 hours long but as long you join us for 30 minutes you can get a fika ticket
 you do not have to register for the event. we hope everyone of you will join
 how can the motivation for mathematics increase in primary school?
 an international viewpoint
 mathmot is built on the assumption that one of the main goals of mathematics teaching should be childrens longterm motivation for learning the subject which aids them to strive for achievement in mathematics. however we know less about the development of mathematics motivation especially on the transition between elementary to middle school. mathmot investigates the development of mathematics motivation as well as factors affecting this process from an international viewpoint.
 50 schools in each country
 the project will investigate mathematics teaching and learning in grade 3 and 4 in 50 schools within each country and follow up these same students one year later. the aim is to deepen our understanding of how motivation related to mathematics develops during the transition from elementary to middle school and what are relevant classroom practices supporting the positive development of motivation for learning mathematics. the project team will collaborate closely with teachers from participating schools and classes both in the interpretation of key findings and in translating this knowledge into practical tools teachers can use in everyday activities.
 contact at university westcecilia thorsenkajsa yang hansen
 how do i apply?
 you apply through the system mobilityonline
 a link will take you to the application for which you submit link available at our web pages
 you will then receive an email to create an account in the system.
 once you have created your account you will be able to login and enter personal data.
 next you will need to uploadtranscript of records of your studies in english you can get them from ladokmy studiesmotivation letter in english
 important finally you need to approve for us processing your documentation checkbox
 nb you will get information on what to do next through the system so enter the email address that you use regularly  and make sure to monitor it.
 more information from your departement
 how do i become a thirdcycle student?
 how do i become a thirdcycle student?
 to begin thirdcycle studies it is usually necessary to be admitted to a thirdcycle programme and also to have a paid post to finance your studies.
 at university west there are four models of doing this
 admitted to the thirdcycle programme at university west and employed as a doctoral student at university west
 admitted to a thirdcycle programme at another university and employed as a doctoral student at university west
 admitted to the thirdcycle programme at university west and employed as a doctoral student at another university
 admitted to the thirdcycle programme at university west and employed ouside the university socalled third party doctoral student  see below
 normally the processes of gaining admission to a thirdcycle programme and gaining employment as a doctoral candidate run parallel to one another.
 you can apply to be employed as a doctoral candidate at university west if andwhen a position is free. university west does not offer stipends or scholarships.
 doctoral posts are advertised and can be applied for just like any other position. doctoral posts are regulated by the higher education ordinance and are fixedterm positions. you must be admitted to a thirdcycle programme to be employed as adoctoral student.
 thirdcycle students have a right to four years of financed fulltime studies. the degree must be completed within eight years. an extension is possible if the student is working in the department falls ill goes on parental leave takes leave to care for children or is doing military service. other types of leave are not excused absences from thirdcycle studies unless the student and employer have agreed otherwise. normally thirdcycle students are required to work in the department where they arestudying  teaching classes for example  up to 20 per cent of a fulltime post. if the thirdcycle student works 20 per cent of a fulltime post in the department he or she will be employed a total of five years. the first year of employment can be extended but only a maximum of two years at a time and should not continue more than a year after the doctoral degree has been awarded.
 thirdparty doctoral student
 there is another way of financing thirdcycle studies that involves employment outside the university. in that case your employer must agree to your taking time off for studies and university west must agree to provide supervision. this is regulated by an ad hoc agreement between the two parties. students who finance their studies this way are called thirdparty doctoral students. these students are expected to devote at least 50 per cent of their time to doctoral studies. the third cycle student has at least one supervisor at university west. there is often an assistant supervisor at the thirdcycle students place of employment. anyone whose studies are financed by a third party or other longterm credible employment can apply directly to be admitted to a thirdcycle programme and become a thirdparty doctoral student.
 how do you get industrial robots to speak the same language?
 a digital twin is a computer model representing something that happens in reality such as in a machine. within industry digital twins are used for example to check whether a new production process works as intended before implementation at the factory. today the creation of a digital twin requires timeconsuming manual programming. changes to the production process cannot be made quickly because each such change requires that the model be reprogrammed.
 the problem is that the information systems found in different suppliers machines are based on unique solutions or different standards and so they cannot be linked in the necessary manner johan continues.
 developing a planning tool
 gabriel began his doctoral studies at university west in march and faces several interesting challenges.
 im going to develop a planning tool for flexible production where you use a digital twin for the programming. it must be able to collect and interpret information from several different types of machines regardless of how advanced they are  and it must also be able to include steps performed by production operators gabriel explains.
 great savings of time and money
 if he solves these challenges within a few years it will be of great significance to companies whose production involves a high level of customisation. a smarter planning tool could mean great savings in terms of both time and money while increasing production reliability and flexibility.
 combining doctoral studies with practical applications
 gabriel is looking forward to being able to combine his doctoral studies at university west with practical applications in the production environment at volvo group.
 gabriel sebastian is one of university wests three new externally employed doctoral students. all are a part of the smart industry sweden industrial graduate school of which another 13 doctoral students from other higher education institutions in sweden are also a part. together with 13 industrial companies across sweden they are working on industrial development in a number of different technical fields.
 more about smart industry sweden
 the students often use their mobile phones to view and sometimes work on their canvas courses. as a teacher it can be useful to know how your course is experienced in the canvas app.
 the student view function allowing you to see and test your course as a student is also available in the app
 download the two canvas apps canvas teacher and canvas student. they look a bit different for android and ios. the images below are from the ios version.
 open your course in canvas teacher.
 select the student view located at the bottom of the list.
 the canvas student app opens in the student view. just like in the web browser this is indicated by a pink border.
 you can view the course content and work within the course as a test student.
 how to optimize welding and additive manufacturing with duplex stainless steel
 additive manufacturing is considered a crucial part of the next generation of industrial production where demands for sustainability are high. to utilize additive manufacturing for duplex stainless steels it is necessary to develop and adapt the technology to the material. amir baghdadchi has dedicated his doctoral studies to developing knowledge on how duplex stainless steel can be optimally used for both laser welding and additive manufacturing using directed energy deposition technique.
 duplex stainless steel are used in a variety of applications thanks to their high corrosion resistance and mechanical properties. however efficient and successful production and joining of dss require precise control of processes and an indepth understanding of the relations between composition processing thermal cycles resulting microstructures and properties. explains amir.
 during the first year as a ph.d. candidate amir focused on laser welding of duplex stainless steel. by experimenting with different shielding gases and laser heating techniques he identified several ways to improve weld joints. he has also developed a new ebsd electron back scatter diffraction methodology that enables the phase fraction analysis of multiphase materials. the methodology can also be used for additively manufactured materials as well as base and weld metals.
 satisfied with the results
 additionally the systematic fourstage methodology can contribute to the easier and more costeffective development of scalable fabrication methods for additively manufacturing of metal components with better mechanical properties and corrosion resistance.
 significant advantages with additive manufacturing
 the benefits and opportunities of additive manufacturing are significant and numerous. it provides new opportunities to fabricate nearnetshape components with a low waste of material customized features tailored properties and complex geometries.
 moreover additive manufacturing provides the opportunity to manufacture the component just after its designing with computer aid design cad. in my phd study a cylinder was produced with am in a short time. however design and fabrication of casting and forging molds for its conventional manufacturing needs several times.
 additionally additive manufacturing provides new opportunities to create lighter components with more complex geometries. altogether these factors can contribute to a more sustainable production.
 for amir the career continues at esab in gothenburg where his expertise in materials science will be valuable in the development of welding materials for various metallic materials with the aim of increasing welding efficiency and performance across various industrial sectors.
 ebsd electron backscatter diffraction
 directed energy deposition additive manufacturing and welding of duplex stainless steel using laser beam
 contact amir baghdadchi doctor of production technology email amir.baghdadchi@esab.se
 how well are we coping with digitalisation at work?
 what happens to people who work in constant change? when there are constantly new digital tools and new rules that require new skills and new working methods?
 i have looked at professions in communication and automotive development both of which are characterised by digital transformation says charlotte arghavan shahlaei recent phd in informatics at university west.
 the media world and the automotive industry are two sectors where the transition to digital technologies has entailed major changes in working methods and skills. when the swedish public debate turned towards the effects of digitalisation around 2015 charlotte had the idea to investigate how professionals are affected by constant changes and new demands on the job.
 new form of learning
 one industry at the forefront of digital transformation is the automotive sector. the engineers who are developing the cars of the future are working more on software development than ever before and often in close collaboration with external developers who also have a vested interest in developing their own products.
 there is a great contrast between managing these everchanging work processes and how we humans are used to learning. as the scale and level of innovation and development increases there are no longer any best practices or established solutions to rely on.
 time for reflection
 charlotte points out that the learning process is made more complex by the constant formation of new team constellations and insufficient time for reflection on newly acquired knowledge and experience.
 it also presents challenges in communication between employees and between management and employees.
 change is the new normal
 my thesis does not provide any readymade solutions. but the findings can provide inspiration and tips for employees and management on how to tackle these challenges.
 it is often said that you need to be flexible to respond to change. but in practice this in itself presents major challenges. building good strategies that support work performance and provide learning opportunities for employees means setting aside sufficient time for reflection discussion and exchange of ideas. but there is no time left when both engineers and their managers spend most of their time trying to meet increasing demands in their development projects.
 what characteristics are important?
 digital technologies and constant changes in products and services will become increasingly common in many professions and industries. so what is required of people who want to work in a digital work environment? what skills and characteristics should employers look for when recruiting?
 in addition to relevant training it is important that employees have a strong drive to learn new things and a positive attitude to change. employers who want to be attractive on the labour market need to establish plans for how to develop their employees skills. and these plans must still be applicable when working conditions change rapidly and continuously.
 read charlotte arghavan shahlaeis thesis rethinking competence on performing digital transformation
 contact charlotte arghavan shahlaei phd in informatics. email charlottearghavan.shahlaei@hv.se. tel 052022 35 23.
 the departments overall mission is to create and develop hr processes that support a good working climate and that the university is perceived as an attractive employer. the department also supports managers in the employer role.
 head of hr
 counsellor student health
 back to main page engineering science
 abroad options engineering science
 huge potential for ai in manufacturing
 todays traditional automation processes are usually designed for high volume production. for the engineering industry to shift to more digitalised production with new sustainable manufacturing techniques such as additive manufacturing the processes need to be fully automated.
 were examining whether and how production systems can resolve problems on their own with the help of ai technology even when unforeseen problems arise during manufacture. if for example a joint is wrongly welded a rapid decision needs to be made about what action to take  should the item be scrapped or amended.
 were testing a number of ideas and comparing ai with other traditional automation techniques to see which technology is best suited to different tasks and requirements.
 compared with the human brain ai technology can handle much more data and more dimensions of a problem.
 if we can manage to find the right use for ai and make the technology simple to use and to adapt to the varied needs of the industry this could bring major benefits for companies in terms of more efficient faster and more costeffective production. above all it will remove monotonous hazardous and unergonomic tasks from the workplace.
 an ongoing national project focuses on process control of additive manufacturing using lasers and wire. another eufunded project integradde has the aim of contributing to more holistic automation and data processing for additive manufacturing.
 for further information contact fredrik sikström senior lecturer in production technology with a focus on process control university west
 the course introduces the student to the challenges involved and methods for overcoming those challenges when designing and developing usable efficient and safe interfaces for human users of interactive systems. the focus is on systems that exhibit at least partial autonomous behavior based on artificial intelligence.
 theoretical part
 human factors limitations of human perception cognition and reaction multimodal peripheral and implicit humancomputer interaction
 established and emerging interaction paradigms e.g. pc wimp interaction paradigm windows icons menus pointing device smartphone touch interaction paradigm intervention user interfaces
 emerging interaction technologies e.g. augmented reality biometric sensor technologies incl. eye tracking
 humancentered ai explainable ai the complexity of humanai codecision making incl. systemlevel risks ethical aspects legal aspects
 the iterative design process of interactive systems conceptualizationrequirements gathering prototyping evaluation
 group project including conceptualizing prototyping and evaluating a user interface to a semiautonomous process. individually performed exercises labs. active participation in discussion seminars.
 stb600sensor technology and image analysis and
 bsd600big data processing and analysis or the equivalent.
 european commissions website for hrs4r
 hur togs campusplanen fram?
 we will close hvdesktop from 130 pm on the 28th of july to perform an update on hvdesktop. it will take about 4 hours to complete the work. until further notice hvdesktop will not be accessible.
 hv desktop will be closed for update on august 16
 hv play disturbance
 you might experience degradation in the hv play service at the moment. our supplier sunet is working on it.
 hv play planned maintenance
 kaltura will perform a planned maintenance window on sunday april 14th between 0500 utc and 2000 utc. potential slownessservice degradation might be observed.
 hv play is our streaming media service. at hv play you as an employee can upload videos and audio files record videos with the screen recording program kaltura capture and subtitle your videos. the material can then be distributed by sharing the link or embedding it on canvas.
 login to hv play
 if you have questions or want to learn more contact the ict educational developers at akademus.
 how do i upload a video?
 how do i change publishing rights for a video?
 how do i change the thumbnail?
 how do i use the editing tool?
 how do i share a video with a colleague?
 how do i make subtitles?
 how do i embed a video in canvas?
 how do i make a screen recording?
 how do i add reflection points?
 the first time you login via a new browser select university west on the login page.
 type west or väst in the box and then select university west. if you do not want to redo this every time you login select on the following pages log in and use forever and yes i am sure  use forever. you can now login with your usual login credentials.
 you upload your video to hv play with create  upload. you can do it in the mobiles browser as well. the video shows how to upload a video. subtitles in english available
 once the video is uploaded it is added to my media where all your videos are gathered in a library. if you have uploaded a lot of videos it may be difficult to find a specific video. it will be much easier if you name the video with a descriptive title. if there are recurring videos add year semester or similar. in my media you can manage all your uploaded videos. the video gives an overview of the features that are available. subtitles in english available
 delete a video by clicking the trash bin. you can delete multiple videos at once by select the videos check mark to the left of the video and then delete from the actions menu. it may take a while before the video is removed. note that once the video is deleted it cannot be restored.
 the thumbnail is the picture displayed before the video starts. the picture is automatically selected when the video is uploaded and can be replaced. the video shows how to change the thumbnail. subtitles in english available
 in hv play is a simple editing tool. you can use it to cut the beginning middle or end of an uploaded video. the video shows how to use the editor. subtitles in english available
 to let a colleague easily use one of your videos in for example a canvas course you can add your colleague as copublisher for your video. the colleague gets the same rights as you to publish the video and can also find the video in my media. the video shows how to do this. subtitles in english available
 hv play has a tool for automatic subtitling of videos. when the automatic subtitling is made it needs to be checked there are always words that go wrong in the subtitling. to make it easy to subtitle there is a lot to think about before the video is recorded. you can read about this and much more as on the page on making audio and video accessible.
 hv play is integrated in canvas which makes it easy to embed your video on a page in canvas. create or open the page where you want to embed the video. click on the plug and select embed hv play.
 you see a list of all your videos in hv play and can choose which video to embed.
 hv play gives you access to the screen recording program kaltura capture. with it you can create course material by recording your screen along with your voice.examples of use is record instructions in digital tools or present a word file on your screen. with screen recording you can make a video of your powerpoint by adding a voice to your slide show. once the video is recorded it will be uploaded to hv play. the first time you use kaltura capture you need to download and install it on your computer. the video gives an overview of kaltura capture. subtitles in english available
 to make the viewer pay more attention to the content and highlight important parts of the video questions can be inserted. the video pauses and the viewer answers the question before the video continues. the video shows how to make a video quiz. subtitles in english available
 with a reflection point inserted in the video it pauses at a specific time to give the viewer the opportunity to reflect over the question posed. subtitles in english available
 you can download your the videos  from hv play to your computer.
 good to know if the video is recorded with kaltura capture only one of the recordings will be downloaded the screen or webcam recording. subtitles in english available
 in a hybrid classroom the idea is that students online should not feel that they are watching the class but that they are part of the class. students on campus should be able to easily see their online classmates and easily see and hear the person asking a question. for the teacher it will be a natural communication both with the students online as well as with those in the room.
 in the hybrid classroom there are screens where digital participants and shared content are displayed. teachers and participants on site can be seen with the help of webcams. the ceiling has speakers microphones and recessed lighting.
 contact the ict educational developers at akademus to book an introduction or if you have other questions about the hybrid classrooms.
 how can i book startup assistance?
 if you want to book startup assistance contact servicecenter@hv.se three working days in advance.
 which are our hybrid classrooms?
 20 seats  i108f404 f408 f409
 the classrooms are furnished with an ushaped seating. there are microphones in the ceiling three screens and a projector.
 the classroom has microphones in the ceiling and five screens.
 the classroom has microphones in the ceiling and five screens. the tables have wheels can be easily moved and arranged in different ways.
 60 seats  f211 f313
 the classroom has microphones in the ceiling screens and a projector.
 for staff using the hybrid classrooms
 hybrid sensing for understanding of laser welding technology for process control hylas
 this networking is expected to give both parts a more profound knowledge and thereby solve complex welding problems both during the project and afterwards. the aim of the project is to increase automation possibilities in existing industrial laser welding technology cells. such increased automation would contribute to sustainable manufacturing and increased flexibility in laser welding industries.
 laser processing like lbw and laser metal wire deposition lmdw are today suffering from robust monitoring and control thus hindering from exploiting their full value. laser welding comprises a number of benefits relative the more wide spread arc welding technologies like less heat input and thereby lower deformations and more means to control the heat input. however the sensing system equipment for monitoring is not yet robust enough to be tractable for industry.
 what is a hybrid studio?
 a hybrid studio is a hybrid classroom in miniature with the difference that you have no participants in the room. the studio can be used for distance education or to participate in zoom meetings.
 there are two hybrid studios on campus h108 and e303b.
 in the studio there are two screens one shows the meeting participants and the other what is shared in the meeting. a web camera is placed between the screens and a table microphone is on the table. the zoom meeting is managed on the touch panel on the table. the table can be raised and lowered. two people can stand or sit behind the table.
 if you have participated in a workshop on hybrid classrooms you can also manage the studio. if you want to attend a workshop book an ict hour and tell us that you want to learn about hybrid classrooms and studios. preferably practice in the studio once before using it.
 if you have questions about these studios contact the ict educational developers at akademus.
 how do i manage screen sharing mic and webcam?
 how do i show participant without webcam?
 to connect to zoom in the hybrid studio you need to know
 if you will host the meeting host key
 if you are going to teach in zoom you will find the information in canvas
 connect to zoom on the touch panel. do not use your own computer to connect to zoom.
 when you connect your laptop with the hdmi cable the sharing of your screen starts automatically. if you share content with audio it will be heard automatically in zoom.
 on the table is a table microphone that is controlled from the touch panel.
 there is a webcam between the two screens. to control and zoom the camera image open the camera control menu.
 the students can be divided into groups called breakout rooms. the video shows how breakout rooms is started and how the group division is done either automatically manually or that the students themselves choose a group. the video shows how this is done in a hybrid classroom but it works the same way in the hybrid studio.
 always end the zoom meeting with leave or end.
 exsus ii  expert competence for sustainable production education project
 dighep digitalisation for health promotion
 elead leading and learning in digital production processes
 lead hybrid leadersjhip and coworkership in hybrid industries
 restart ii operator guidance for machine error recovery through artificial intelligence and augmented reality
 completed projects
 ahil  artificial and human intelligence through learning
 digital seniorsdesigning technology for ageing
 distributed collaboration technologies indigodigitalisera produktionen  hur gör man?
 prodexnew educational model meets industrys need for professional development
 restart irobot errror stop agent recovery tool
 sesmasharing economy and smart mobility acceptance
 iail_webinarium_ht2021.pdf
 i can retire when we have industrial robots that think for themselves
 congratulations fredrik. how does it feel to have been appointed professor?
 it feels great to receive the recognition of many years of work in the field. it may not change my daily life much but i am naturally happy about it.
 what has meant the most during your 24 years at university west?
 we can use ai to give robots multiple abilities so that they can work more flexibly. when robots learn to think for themselves we wont have to spend so much time reprogramming them. retooling a production facility for a new product will go quickly. the robots will take care of the heavy dangerous work and humans will have more advanced work tasks.
 today though there is significant interest in ai and automation. it has become an important competitive factor in swedish industry since other countries like china are investing heavily in the field.
 what motivates you?
 it is exciting to do things that no one else has done before. the creativity and freedom to think in new ways is probably what i like the most about this profession.
 if we look even further into the future 3040 years i think that humanlike robots called humanoid robots will work in industry sidebyside with more highly trained engineers.
 apply for a paid internship through iaeste and create an international network and friends for life
 what is iaeste?iaeste stands for the international association for the exchange of students for technical experience and mediates international internships for students and recruits qualified interns for companies and authorities. students get practical experience abroad in their subject area. the organization is primarily focused on technology natural sciences and architecture but also has students in for example economics and marketing in its network. iaeste is represented in over 80 countries and on all continents.
 what can you as a uw student do?
 as an hv student you can apply for internships via iaeste during any part of your education that you choose and in many cases also after completing your degree within a year afterwards. it is possible to apply for both shorter summer internships and longer internships that span one or two semesters. these can also often be combined with exjobs if the program manager at your university agrees.
 the application is made directly to iaeste. read more about how to apply on iaestes website.
 the iaeste host at your destination will help arrange accommodation and will invite you to various social activities. you also get help with everything administrative such as applying for a visa work permit and opening a bank account.
 most internships have english as the main language. in some cases there are other language requirements which in that case can be seen from the location description.
 how much does it cost?
 all iaeste places are paid. the internship salary varies but must always be at least enough for food and living. the compensation levels depend on who the employer is and in which country it is concerned.
 improving the understanding of microstructure formation in additively manufactured nibased superalloys through modelling.
 haynes282 haynes international usa is one of the nibased superalloys that is used for turbine rear frame and turbine exhaust case applications. the main reasons for the use of this alloy are due to the combination of properties like creep strength thermal stability and fabricability.  because of the excellent fabricability of this alloy there is a great interest within the industries to manufacture haynes 282 through powder bed fusion pbf techniques.
 as pbf enable the capability to produce nearnetshape complex lightweight parts and the possibility of customizing the microstructure during processing it ultimately improves the efficiency and enhances the sustainability within aerospace and gas turbine industry.  however still the knowledge and understanding within pbf of haynes 282 is not yet mature enough so that the industry could confidently use it for component production. this could be clearly seen as there are only a few published scientific literatures on pbf of haynes 282.
 generally the metal pbf is a complex process that involves numerous process parameters and manufacturing steps. during manufacturing the built material undergoes complex thermal cycling because of the layeruponlayer building process. moreover posttreatment such as hot isostatic pressing hip and heat treatment causes further changes the material that significantly influences the functional performance of the component. thus it is important to identify the effect of these thermal conditions on the microstructure and how these microstructures affect the functional performance and quality of the printed parts. understanding these relationships also make it possible to optimise the pbf microstructures for desired applications which is of great interest for the project partners.
 iceri2024  international education conference in spain1113 november
 if you would like to take part in the conference and you have experiences or projects to present we invite you to submit your abstract proposal for iceri2024. you can choose whether to submit it as an inperson presentation or a virtual one.abstracts should be within the scope of the topic areas listed in the section topics
 the deadline for submission of abstracts is july 11th 2024.
 iceri2024 will be one of europes largest education conferences. anyone with an interest in education is welcome to join iceri2024  experience it for yourself in seville this november
 more information iceri2024  international education conference in spain 1113 november iated.org
 the ict educational developers provide teachers with inspiration guidance and pedagogical support when using digital tools in teaching.we support development in a variety of areas such as course design distance learning and digital accessibility which often results in practical application in canvas zoom hv play or our alc and hybrid classrooms.
 you can reach us every day at our dropin or by email.
 ict hour
 book an hour with an ict educational developer individually or in a group on our booking pages. the hour is adapted to your wishes which you specify in the booking. book a room where we meet if a special room is needed e.g. a hybrid classroom you book it. contact us for further discussion.
 take a basic course get help with course layouts in canvas or deepen your knowledge about canvas.book an ict hour  our digital learning environment
 book a tutorial where we go through your digital exam in inspera. please note that the booking is only possible after mandatory inspera training in canvas.
 book an ict hour  digital examination in inspera
 hybriddecentralized classroom teaching
 learn more about hybrid and decentralized classroom teaching.
 book an ict hour  hybriddecentralized classroom teaching
 distance learning with zoom
 learn about using zoom in teaching.
 book an ict hour  distance learning with zoom
 what possibilities are there to record and work with video? how do i adapt videos for better accessibility? and how do i use my videos in a canvas course?book an ict hour  video in teaching
 get started with your teaching in alc or develop your working methods.book an ict hour  active learning classroom
 how a digital collaboration space can be used in teaching. demonstrated with padlet.book an ict hour  digital collaboration surface
 if you have been subjected
 if you have been harassed
 here you will find information on what to do if you feel you have been subjected to harassment sexual harassment or any other type of discrimination or victimisation.
 if you feel that you are being subjected to any form of harassment or victimisation you should if possible clearly and unequivocally tell the perpetrator that the behaviour is unwanted and that you want it to stop. try to be as specific as possible about what behaviorstatement you perceive as offensive.
 document what happened. make a note of the time date any witnesses the event and what the person who harassed you said andor did your reaction and experience what where when and how.
 contact channels for students
 if you do not want to go through a manager you can instead contact
 student health care
 coordinator for students with disabilities
 accept offers of processing and support if it is deemed important.
 if you want to make a formal report of harassment or victimisation you will find forms and information on where to submit them under the heading formal report.
 contact channels for employees
 request a oneonone conversation with your line manager and tell them what has happened. if what has happened concerns the relationship between you and this manager you can turn to your immediate superior.
 hr specialists
 safety representative
 if you want to make a formal report of any form of harassment or victimisation you will find forms and information about where to submit them under the heading formal report.
 a report of harassment discrimination or victimisation can be made both by the person who feels they have been subjected to harassment or by someone who has observed the abuse.
 the report must contain an account of what happened when and where who was involved and in what way as well as information about any witnesses.
 you can use this form or submit an oral report
 report of discrimination or harassment.docx
 submit a written report to registrator@hv.se or to university west gustava melins gata 2 461 86 trollhättan.
 you can also submit a verbal or written report to someone you trust such as a teacher or a colleague or to one of the following functions
 lawyerinvestigator
 head of human resources
 hr specialist
 the person who receives the report ensures that it is documented and that it is handed over to the person responsible for investigating and taking action. you can of course get in touch for advice before you decide whether or not to make a formal report.
 a formal report becomes a public document at the university and is registered in our case management system.
 a late afternoon at ikea in torp shoppingcenter uddevalla to get useful items for your home in trollhättan  or just for fun
 when monday 20 january
 time departure from trollhättan at 1400. the bus will leave from outside the university service center entrance.
 the bus leaves from ikea uddevalla at 1900.
 how to sign up through online form below no later than thursday 16 january 1400.
 limited amount of seats available  be sure to sign up earlykind regards
 international office team
 boka en ikttimme  active learning classroom
 new immersive technologies generate both opportunities and challenges for skills development among organizations located in the industrial sector such as transport and manufacturing companies. on the one hand organizations can use modern virtual reality vr technology to train and prepare their employees for complex work activities that are stressful unpredictable demanding high attention while on the other hand organizations and employees must learn how to use such technology in a meaningful way over time. the tension that arises because of the field between opportunities and challenges generates problems that are rooted in an uncertainty among organizations that need to prepare their practitioners for sensitive stressful and potentially dangerous circumstances at work. such types of problems are classified as wicked problems problems that arise under uncertain unpredictable and complex circumstances that cannot be dealt with using established forms of knowledge
 this course provides a comprehensive overview of immersive media design and development with an emphasis on practical applications. topics include the principles of immersive media its impact on society and handson experience designing and constructing virtual and augmented environments vrar. the course also covers techniques for interacting with these environments and focuses on the application of immersive media for enhancing understanding and creating impactful experiences through exercises and workshops.
 the overall purpose of this project is to enhance the understanding of the microstructure evolution in the ni base superalloys marm247 and haynes 282 respectively during additive manufacturing am by powder bed fusionelectron beam pbfeb.
 the material system of the alloy marm247 in focus is complex with high fraction of γ. it has a very high oxidation resistance which makes  suitableit suitable for hot gas path components such as turbine blades guide vanes and heat shields. due to the complex microstructure this type of alloy is often not easy to weld and it has been difficult to manufacture it process them with am techniques such as powder bed fusionlaser beam pbflb.ref olutayo adegokes phd thesis. haynes 282 on the other hand  is a more lean nibased super alloys with less oxidation resistance than marm247 but still with other important beneficial high temperature mechanical properties. therefore the aim of this project is to perform dual investigations of these two different nibased superalloys of high interest for aerospace. gkn aerospaces goal with the project is to attain fundamental understanding of these type of materials at condition typical for pbfeb to aid in the implementation of this manufacturing technique to replace conventionally cast products.
 to reach the goal of the project gkn has teamed up with högskolan väst hv and kth kungliga tekniska högskolan kth to perform insitu investigation of these ni base superalloys during pbfeb processing. this will be achieved by using highenergy xray characterization techniques and a newly developed sample environment dedicated to simulate pbfeb conditions while allowing insitu diffraction and scattering measurements and highspeed imaging ?. the experiments are planned to be performed at the beamlines p21.2 and p61a at petra iii desy in hamburg for which the sample environment has been designed for.
 submit abstracts to kristina.johansson@hv.se  in subject write call for papers vilär 2021.  note maximum of 300 words exkl. references. you will receive an answer within a week.
 1  november   call for abstracts extented time for submission of abstract til the 8th of november
 last day for submitting an abstract is 1 st of november for presentationinteractive session.
 last day to register and last day for cancellation of participation in conference.
 vilär conference is arranged by lina and university west in trollhättan.
 the conference this year will be in hybride form.
 december 13th 2015 deadline to submit abstract for presentation
 february 1st 2016 notification of the abstracts that have been accepted                                                           february 15th 2016 registration for early bird
 april 1st 2016 closing date for registration to summer school
 may 15th 2016 closing date for registration to nyris13
 june 1314th 2016   summer school
 june 1517th 2016 conference nyris13
 we would like to inform you that we will be performing improvement work on our hvdesktop today march 15th 2023. during this time hvdesktop will not be available from 430 pm to 800 pm. we apologize for any inconvenience this may cause and thank you for your understanding.
 improving knowledge outcomes in segregated schools but how?
 this project is about examining politically initiated measures forincreased equality topdown measures and local initiatives to strengthen the schools compensatory capacity bottomup initiatives.
 schools with low educational results in segregated and marginalized areas challenge the swedish educationsystems goal of a highquality school for all. this project is about examining politically initiated measures forincreased equality topdown measures and local initiatives to strengthen the schools compensatory capacity bottomup initiatives. at present there is little systematic knowledge about the effects of topdown measures and almost no deep understanding of bottomup initiatives for improving the quality of schools with low educational results in marginalized areas. against this background the project aims to study how improvement initiatives for schools with low educational results are implemented. how different forms of topdown measures and bottomup initiatives and different components of such interventions have an effect and in what way and to what extent they promote students knowledge development and secure more equal life opportunities.
 improving the knowledge results of schools in cities and in rural areas
 the project aim to study and compare initiatives for improvement in schools with low academic achievement examining how they are initiated and implemented and the extent to which they both contribute to students knowledge development and create conditions for moreequal life opportunities.
 in marginalised areas schools with low academic achievement challenge the swedish education systems goal of highquality education for all. this project concerns topdown politically initiated measures for increased equality and botomup local initiatives to strengthen the compensatory capacity of schools in marginalised areas of large cities and in rural areas. at present there is little systematic knowledge about the effects of the different types of initiative and how they are designed and adapted to the contexts that constitute large cities and rural areas. the project uses a mixedmethod approach combining i a survey with staff members at a selection of schools from across the country in large cities.
 in a world full of risks companies need a combined quality strategy
 i investigate factors that make companies more resilient to promote a riskaware culture within companies and their supply chains. some of the factors include that companies today need to understand the importance of being innovation and designled while simultaneously being flexible and robust within the company as well as in their supply chains. the companies with the best supply chains will be the best equipped in the future.
 what questions do you work on and how you collaborate with industrial companies?
 i identify and implement strategies to make companies and value chains resilient especially in the event of disruptions in the supply chain. this means that we must be prepared for potential problems and crises. skf and ericsson are some of the companies we collaborate with today.
 what benefits does it generate for the industry and society?
 one challenge is balancing costs and resources when creating redundant systems within companies. for example having two suppliers instead of one is more expensive but it is a necessary cost to increase resilience. additionally companies must consider whether to produce near their market or continue importing cheaper products from asia. its a complex balancing.
 why have you chosen to work at university west?
 note lean and six sigma are methodologies used in business and manufacturing for process improvement.
 inairwire  inprocess control of additive manufacturing using laser and filler wire
 the inairwire project intends to provide swedish industry with additional methods to remain at the forefront of the use of additive manufacturing technology. it is about using laser melting of metal wire to build components for the aviation industry that provide high reliability and low impact on the environment.
 innovative and industrially feasible methods for monitoring and controlling the process including new sensor applications and control algorithms will be investigated with the purpose to give guaranteed material properties qualified for aircraft engines.
 the wefforts will be performed through a continuous and close collaboration between gkn aerospace and university west at the production technology center in trollhättan. the partners have successful experience of collaborating in similar projects. inairwire provides continuity in this collaboration where together we will gain new knowledge about the effect of temperature on tthe built component.
 industrial outcomes of inairwire will provide indepth understanding of how utilization of sensor information and control algorithms can ensure material properties focusing on nickel base alloys.
 swift dabasesxiban se71 1200 0000 0128 1010 3186account no 1281 0103 186
 the aim of this project is to investigate experiences of being included andor excluded at university west.
 being included means feeling welcomed and respected and able to take a place in the community just as you are. being excluded means not being able to take a place on the same terms as others. the degree to which a person feels included in a context can depend for example on the persons gender ethnic background skin color age or disability.
 who feels at home and who feels uncomfortable in academic contexts? more knowledge is needed about how inclusion and exclusion work in order for higher education institutions to be able to live up to the laws visions and guidelines that exist in terms of justice social sustainability and democracy. thus these questions also concern the social and political conditions for both employees and students knowledge processes.
 the purpose of the study
 the purpose of this study is to deepen and develop knowledge processes of both employees and students about inequality within the academy with a primary focus on ethnificationracialization within university west but also how these categories can be related to other inequality patterns.
 we intend to answer the following four questions
 to what extent do employees and students perceive themselves as includedexcluded in relation to ethnicityrace class gendergender identity religion age sexuality and disability?
 what experiences and understandings of inclusion and exclusion processes do employees and students express?
 in what contexts do employees and students perceive that inclusionexclusion takes place?
 how is ethnificationracialization perceived to interact with other social categorizations in relation to inclusionexclusion?
 to gain a better understanding of these issues we intend to collect material in different ways.
 web survey
 the survey examines inclusion and exclusion from an intersectional perspective. in this way we find out what employees and students experience from inclusion and exclusion at university west.
 we want as many people as possible to answer the survey. you can add important experiences of inclusion and exclusion that are important to us.
 here you can read about how the survey is conducted.
 the questionnaire will be emailed to all employees and students.
 interviews  with staff including doctoral students
 through interviews with employees we gain an indepth understanding of how inclusion and exclusion processes work and how employees experience them.
 here you can read about how the interviews are conducted.
 stories  from students
 through stories from students we gain an indepth understanding of how inclusion and exclusion processes work and how students experiences them.
 here you can read about how the stories are collected.
 supportparticipation in the study may risk arousing unpleasant memories and feelings. if you require support after participating in the survey
 staff employees at university west are offered conversational support by the occupational health service avonova. you can then contact avonova in trollhättan without having to speak to your boss or another person. avonova is prepared for calls to come.
 studentsfor students student health at university west offers conversational support. both maria blomqvist and anette ryckenberg at student health have been interviewed and prepared for conversations to take place. you can contact them via studenthalsan@hv.se
 increase in applications from international students
 on friday the application period expired for international students for the autumn of 2021. in the offer this time there were two programs at the undergraduate level and about ten programs at the advanced level of which several news are also given at a distance such as master in electrical vehicle engineering. the number of applicants increases by just over 20 percent at university west.
 tomas bengtsson responsible for international student recruitment at university west.
 we have an increase of 22 percent in the number of international applicants for our programs in english. the two most popular masters programs are manufacturing engineering and international business. our bachelors program international program in politics and economics is also a very popular program says tomas bengtsson who is responsible for international student recruitment at university west.
 tomas bengtsson describes that the university has built on the relatively new work with the goal of increasing the number of international program students at university west and that these initiatives are now bearing fruit. even before the corona pandemic work had begun on being able to provide several of the programs at the advanced level also at a distance to enable even more people to apply for the programs.
 we try to establish a presence in selected focus areas both within and outside the eu to make our range of programs in english visible. this year we have had to work on developing a more digital presence and we have conducted over 30 webinars and participated in upwards of 10 digital fairs and conducted digital advertising campaigns.
 some of the programs are still open for late registration.
 contact tomas bengtsson tomas.bengtsson@hv.se 46706993918
 industrial production is becoming more complex and demands for increased digitalization sustainability and new professional competences are growing. digitalization creates opportunities for development of new combinations of physical production and services which results in increased specialized customer customization. this in turn calls for a more flexible production system with shorter leadtime and personnel that have skills and competences to quickly adapt and make use of new digital applications for everyday work practice.
 the course aims to provide insight into industrial automated manufacturing and with which basic building blocks an automation system is built and structured around. in the course you will also learn how different industrial control systems are used and for which applications they are suitable. a laboratory work is carried out around a system for discrete logic event control in real time plc which is a common control system for industrial automation.
 degree of bachelor of science in computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering or industrial engineering and management. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 he credits in programming and 15 he credits in mathematics. verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english 6 in the swedish upper secondary school high school or equivalent.
 industrial digitalization  aspects of industry 4.0 idiu60
 industrial digitalization  aspects of industry 4.0 25 hp
 we already see how digitalization has challenged and transformed several different areas of our everyday life as well as our professional life.
 in this course the focus is on the new opportunities created as industry is further digitalized. with each new disrupted technology one needs to understand how the techniques work in order to make the best use of it. digitalization will affect different industries in different ways and at different rates depending on which new technologies are applicable in the production environment and depending on how the companies value chain is designed.
 this course begins with an overview of industry 4.0 and the basics of digitalization. after that we go through a range of techniques how they work and examples of applications. the intention is that you should create an understanding what can be of interest specifically for your organization. examples of technologies are digital twin big data cyber security iot iiot deep learning ai etc.
 this module will be offered during autumn 2020 as part of the course machine learning for industry 4.0 starting in autumn 2020.
 educational setup
 the course is given online which requires participants to have access to the internet. supplementary teaching material is distributed via a learning management system where links web meetings as well as instructions are distributed.
 read more here
 digitization challenges and transforms several different areas both in our everyday lives and in working life. this course focuses on the enormous opportunities and challenges that arise when the industry is digitized. with each new technological leap you need to understand how the technology works in order to be able to make the best use of it. digitization affects companies in different ways and at different rates depending on which new technologies can be used and how the companys value chain is structured. digitization gives the company the opportunity to streamline increase quality and reduce production costs increase flexibility and new revenues. with the right knowledge and insights into the challenges and opportunities of digitalisation you create a good basis for strategic and operational decisions. the goal is a production that is smart flexible and resource efficient which also contributes to the companys attractiveness as a workplace.
 the course provides broad knowledge and understanding of industrial processes and various digitization techniques such as internet of things iot digital twins cyber security digital supply chain virtual reality selfdeciding robot cells big data and artificial intelligence. you gain knowledge about the impact of these techniques on different production processes and how they are possible to apply to different production environments. in summary you get a systematic approach when a business is to be digitized and you learn an innovative way of thinking. the course is aimed at those who have a basic understanding of industrial activities.
 roa200robotics and automation and
 vpr400virtual production and
 industrial operator support for machine restart restart ii
 industrial competence development and lifelong learning
 we study and develop methods and strategies for competence development upskilling and reskilling.
 industrial transition for sustainable development
 we study and develop models and solutions for a sustainable green industrial sector undergoing global transition.
 industry is facing a global climate transition with demands for new green investments and sustainable working life. it is important for companies to be able to participate in global value chains with a focus on the sustainable development of safe smart goods and services.
 industrial workintegrated learning weld vr
 industrial workintegrated learning  making new technology fit to practice
 industrial skills development and lifelong learning
 watch the film to find out more
 digitalisation and knowledge development in industrial environments.
 industrial competence development and lifelong learning.
 siemens energy gkn aerospace and university west
 the challenge of transferring new technologies to working practice
 lars walter professor of workintegrated learning with focus on digitalisation of industry university west
 charlotte arghavan phd in informatics university west
 when we rely on technology we start thinking like machines
 anders sandblad phd in industrial workintegrated learning
 news articles about iwil
 about
 this is workintegrated learning
 text tobias båth
 cooperative education coop en form av ail
 supply chain management
 6th semester of regular studies
 germanyhtw saar  starting study period 4
 malaysiataylors university   starting study period 4
 4th semester of regular studies
 universitetslektor                        ph.d. computer science and engineering
 artificial intelligence ai and machine learning ml are powerful tools used in a wide variety of areas such as finance healthcare ecommerce industry entertainment and many others to automate numerous tasks. for example in healthcare an ml algorithm can be used to predict a diagnosis based on the patients data. an autonomous vehicle can employ an ai algorithm to decide whether to apply emergency breaking. fraud and money laundering can also be successfully identified by ai and ml technology when used by a financial institution. successful deployment of this technology requires understanding of application areas of different ai and ml algorithms and their performance characteristics.
 this course introduces the most common concepts ml and ai. attention is given to proper applicability of different algorithms to diverse types of data. importance of the quality of the data is emphasized as one of the keys to successful data analysis. the examination of the course is based on field study where the students apply the knowledge in their own area of expertise.
 the target group for the course is senior and medium level management as well as engineering and technical personnel unfamiliar with ai and ml technology.
 this course will be delivered on distance. the outline of the course is one online introduction session prerecorded lectures online exercises and examination.
 industrins digitalisering  cyber security
 industrins digitalisering  cyber security 25 hp
 industrins digitalisering  internet of things iot
 industrins digitalisering  internet of things iot 25 hp
 artificial intelligence ai and machine learning ml are powerful tools used in a wide variety of areas such as finance healthcare ecommerce industry entertainment and many others to automate numerous tasks. for example in healthcare an ml algorithm can be used to predict a diagnosis based on the patients data. an autonomous vehicle can employ an ai algorithm to decide whether to apply emergency breaking. fraud and money laundering can also be successfully identified by ai and ml technology when used by a financial institution. successful deployment of this technology requires understanding of application areas of different ai and ml algorithms and their performance characteristics.this course introduces the most common concepts ml and ai. attention is given to proper applicability of different algorithms to diverse types of data. practical exercises are provided to give handson experience. importance of the quality of the data is emphasized as one of the keys to successful data analysis.
 sources of data
 data quality and cleaning
 types of machine learning algorithms
 types of artificial intelligence algorithms
 machine learning and artificial intelligence application areas
 contact information and opening hours
 opening hours at service center at the beginning of autumn semester 2024from 19 august until 23 august         monday  friday 11.00  13.00from 26 august until 13 september  monday  thursday 08.00  16.30                                                                        friday 08.00  16.00from 16 september until 4 october   monday  friday 10.00  14.00
 opening hours at service centerwe are available for you daily from 11.00  13.00 in person
 opening hours via telephonemonday  thursday 08.00  16.30friday 08.00  16.00closed for lunch 12.0013.00 and closes at 14.00 on mondays
 phone 0046 520 22 30 00email international@hv.se you can also book a zoom meeting with us.
 we at the international office are providing you as a student with ideas and input to make your stay in sweden an even greater experience.
 the programme serves as a platform to
 to get to know each other and make friends
 to enjoy your time as an international student in sweden
 to get to know the swedish culture
 an activity plan will be sent out every week from the international office to all members. you then set a date and meeting point and to experience fun activities with your group.
 example activities of the programme are
 visit a christmas market
 attend a crayfish party
 go on a trip to the north of sweden and go on a dogsled ride
 be a tourist in gothenburg
 celebrate swedish midsommar
 ... and many more...
 sounds interesting? how to sign up
 in order to sign up you have to fill this form.
 the program restarts every semester. the deadline to sign up for the autumn semester is the 3rd of august.
 swedish language lessons
 where
 on campus in c118120
 when
 mondays at 1700 starting on the 16th of september christmas break in week 51 week 52 and week 1
 who
 every student in university west
 teacherat the beginning of october there will be a new teacher taking over the classes. if you are fluent in both swedish and english language and are passionate about teaching you are welcome to apply for this paid studentteacher job opportunity. please send your cv and a short motivational letter to us at international@hv.se
 what is it
 here you can learn basic swedish for everyday life. the lessons are held on a studenttostudent basis which means that another student will be your teacher in this class. the swedish class is free of charge and you cannot earn credits with this class
 you do not have to register you can just show up to one of the classes and receive information on course literature and the course from the teacher.
 information about corona
 about studies and the situation with corona
 this page informs you about teaching and examination due to the situation with covid19.
 in short this applies to university west
 in april 2022 university west returned to regular operations with teaching and examinations on campus in accordance with current syllabuses.
 if you have questions about teaching and examinations contact the courseprogramme manager and stay uptodate on the course information available on canvas.
 this applies to exams examination
 examinations are carried out according to the current syllabus. if you have questions regarding your examination please contact the examiner for the examination in question.keep in mind that you must register for all classroom exams at högskolan väst. registration opens 25 days before and is open until 8 days before the exam.information on how to register.
 of course it is important that we all still think about protecting ourselves and others from the spread of infection. the swedish public health agencys website has all the information about what applies.
 protect yourself and others against covid19
 the recommendations that remain in society and at the university are
 stay home in case of symptoms of illness
 continue to wash your hands carefully
 the swedish public health agency recommends everyone who can and who is 12 years and older to be vaccinated against covid19.
 those who are unvaccinated should be extra careful and avoid indoor environments where many people gather. this recommendation only applies to adults.
 read more about corona and covid19 on the swedish public health agencys website
 frequently asked questions and answers
 information is filled in gradually.
 previously published about corona
 latest news the restrictions are removed since february 9th
 during the press conference on february 3 the government announced that most of the restrictions on covid19 will be removed on february 9 2022.
 vice chancellor comments the current situationwe understand if you as a student can feel anxious during these pandemic times and to come to campus. our principal martin hellström has answered why education and examination should as far as possible be arranged on site. read vice chancellor comments the current situation.
 how can i be able to study online?you will find informationon on our web page support and service for distance studies.
 where do i turn if i have questions about my studies examination forms group work reports practical skills tests labs seminars and other assignments?at first wait for information via canvas from the teacher responsible for your course.
 general information about how university west handles the situation
 all types of student support
 go to new student
 support and service for distance studies
 students and staff are encouraged to keep themselves informed
 the public health agency of sweden
 emergency information
 sos alarm important phone numbers
 swedish agency for government employers
 information kring corona
 uds reseinformation
 information kring coronaviruset
 recommendations on the coronavirus
 information for staff about the coronavirus
 here you will find information and recommendations that apply to all of us employees. we closely monitor the spread of the infection and new advice and recommendations can come quickly.
 if students have questions about possibilities to online alternatives for example in case of cold symptoms it is the responsible teacher who decides what might be offered.
 of course it is important that we all still think about protecting ourselves and others from the spread of infection
 wash your hands
 stay home if you feel sick
 the swedish public health agencys website has all the information about what applies.more information at the public health agency of swedens webpage. in swedish
 you can send your questions to servicecenter@hv.se which sends questions further when needed.
 teaching in a digital environment
 link to academus webpages
 coronavirus and force majeure
 agreements external parts to staff portal
 information to students about suspension
 information about suspension
 according to chapter 10. section 2 of the higher education ordinance the disciplinary board may decide on the suspension of a student who has attempted to deceive during examinations disrupted teaching examinations in libraries etc. or subjected another student or employee to harassment or sexual harassment. below is more information about what a suspension means.
 the decision can be appealed to the administrative court. at the end of the decision protocol you will find out what to do if you want to appeal. you can always contact the investigator if you have any questions.
 the suspension normally takes effect one week after the disciplinary board has made its decision. during that week you will study as usual including taking part in examinations.
 when the suspension begins your student account on hv.se will be closed and you will not be able to access your canvas pages or student emails.
 in accordance with chapter 10. 13 of the higher education ordinance swedish board of student finance csn is also informed because you are not entitled to student loans when you are suspended.
 you are not allowed to participate in any teaching or examination at university west during the time the suspension is in effect. this applies to all courses you are registered for not just the one you were registered for.
 even though you are suspended you still have the right to contact the student health service and study councelling if you need such support.
 when the suspension is over your student account will be opened and you can start studying as usual again.
 if the suspension is for misleading examination cheating your teacher may not assess and grade the submitted examination until the suspension is over. normally cheating means that you will fail the examination.
 if you have missed examinations and reexaminations during the suspension you will have to make up for them at the next opportunity given on the course in question. normally there is a regular examination and a reexamination within the framework of each course occasion after which you must wait until the next time the course is given again.
 in some cases there may be the opportunity for an extra examination at the end of the semester. check with your teacher or education officer about your course.
 if you have fallen behind a lot in your studies you can contact a study counsellor to get help planning for how to catch up.
 an ongoing suspension will be visible in ladok for staff but the suspension will not be visible on the result certificate or registration certificate or in the degree certificate.
 the staff nurse clinical leader at the bedside  swedish registered nurses perceptions
 patients perceptions of barriers for participation in nursing care
 patient participation in nursing care  an interpretation by swedish registered nurses.
 patient participation in nursing care  towards a concept clarification from a nurse perspective
 hindrance for patient participation in nursing care
 monika j. m. sahlsten inga larsson kaethy a. e. plos catharina s. c. lindencrona
 patients perceptions of nurses behaviour that influence patient participation in nursing care  a critical incident study
 an analysis of the concept of patient participation.
 nurse strategies for optimising patient participation in nursing care
 patient participation in nursing care from a patient perspective  a grounded theory study
 teachers beliefs norms and values of gender equality in preschools
 responsible for university wests budget and forecasting longterm budget financial part year end closing development of the universitys financial management financial reporting to management board and ministries support to management and the board on financial matters
 university west works actively in developing collaborations with important actors which can support teachers and reseaechers in enterpreunership and commersialization questions.
 chalmers innovation office
 chalmers innovation office is part of the chalmers organization and they have entered into partnerships with additional universities university west university of skövde university of borås university of jönköping and university of halmstad. the support is primarily channeled via a local innovation advisor at each university. university wests local innovation advisor is alexandra bousiou.
 ptc innovation ab
 ptc innovation is located at the production technology center in trollhättan. here there is advanced equipment and everything required to develop new smart production methods that strengthen the competitiveness of technology companies and ensure that we retain industrial production in sweden.
 drivhuset in university west
 innovatums incubator is a place for people with innovative ideas to start run and develop their ideas projects and businesses. the ideas that are accepted into the incubator must have a high level of innovation and be scalable and preferably have the potential to become internationally profitable. the incubators role is to support and provide advice to ensure that your projectbusiness reaches its full potential. as an incubator company you get expertise offices contacts and routes to capital. you also get a business coach connected to you as direct support in your process.
 the incubator has a strong collaboration with drivhuset and the vast majority of people who meet us who are connected to the university have previously been in contact with and received support from drivhuset. we work with people and ideas in all sectors. several alumni from university west now sit in our premises and run their companies.
 feel free to contact us and we will book a meeting and listen to your idea
 industrial dynamics
 university west is a member in connect väst which is a nonprofit organization that wants to contribute to more jobs in west sweden. connect väst works with startups for small and mediumsized companies so they can grow faster and more efficiently. through socalled stepping stones companies receive help and advice to develop and grow. the university contributes expertise in the expert panels that are connected to the stepping stones.
 wargön innovation
 wargön innovation will become a national development and knowledge center within process and production technology for new environmentally sustainable materials. here the knowledge and infrastructure are ready to take material innovations from the lab to commercial pilot volumes. university west is involved as an interested party in the work.
 with loans risk capital and business development almi creates opportunities to realize your idea to grow. almi is close to the companies with a broad knowledge of entrepreneurship and sustainable growth.
 wifi
 installation guide for eduroam android
 requirements for installing eduroam
 that you have an university west account.
 that you have verified your identity. you can verify your identity at servicecenter or at the website mittkonto.hv.se my account. if you have a west card you have already verified your identity. read about how you can verify your identity on the web here.
 install eduroam
 start a browser on your phone.
 go to eduroam.hv.se and follow the onscreen instructions. when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account.
 please note your phone must be connected to the internet during the installation either via your phone operator or a wireless network. at university west there is the wifi hvguest.
 once you have installed eduroam your device will connect to eduroam as soon as you are in the range of an eduroam network.
 with wifieduroam you can connect to internet at campus trollhättan and many other places. more information about eduroam.
 installation guide for eduroam google chromebook
 wifi  eduroam for google chromebook
 installation guide for wireless network
 that you have a university west account
 that you have verified your identity. you can verify your identity in the service center or at the web address mittkonto.hv.se. if you have a west card you have already verified your identity. read about how you can verify your identity on the web here.
 a. if you are on campus go to wireless networks on your computer. select hv guest. a window with information about hvguest pops up close that window. open the google chrome web browser and go to eduroam.hv.se follow the onscreen instructions.please note when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account. a warning may come up and then you must approve.
 b. if you are in another place where there are networks that you have access to go to wireless networks on your computer. connect to the network you have access to. open the google chrome web browser go to eduroam.hv.se and follow the onscreen instructions.please note when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account. a warning may come up and then you must approve.
 more information about eduroam.
 installation guide for eduroam iphone  ipad
 go to eduroam.hv.se and follow the onscreen instructions. when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account. during the installation a warning may come up and then you must approve.
 with wifieduroam you can connect to internet at campus trollhättan and many other places. more information about eduroam.
 installation guide for eduroam mac
 wifi  eduroam for mac
 a. if you are on campus go to wireless networks on your computer in the top right corner. select hv guest a web page about wifi pops up choose eduroam and follow the onscreen instructions. if this should not work start google chrome and go directly to eduroam.hv.seplease note when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account. at one point you should download a file. sometimes you can run it at once but sometimes you have to save it first. a warning may come up and then you must approve.
 b. if you are in another place where there are networks that you have access to go to wireless networks on your computer in the top right corner. connect to the network you have access to. open a web browser and go to eduroam.hv.se and follow the onscreen instructions.please note when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account. at one point you should download a file. sometimes you can run it at once but sometimes you have to save it first. a warning may come up and then you must approve.
 wifi  eduroam for pc
 a. if you are at campus go to wireless networks on your computer far down to the right. select hv guest a web page about wifi pops up choose eduroam and follow the onscreen instructions. if the web page does not pop up start a web browser and go directly to eduroam.hv.seplease note when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account. at one point you should download a file. sometimes you can run it at once but sometimes you have to save it first. a warning may come up and then you must approve.
 b. if you are in another place where there are networks that you have access to go to wireless networks on your computer far down to the right. connect to the network you have access to. open a web browser and go to eduroam.hv.se and follow the onscreen instructions.please note when you log in to eduroam you log in with your uw account. at one point you should download a file. sometimes you can run it at once but sometimes you have to save it first. a warning may come up and then you must approve.
 installationsguide för eduroam google chromebook
 wifi  eduroam för google chromebook
 mer information om eduroam.
 wifi  eduroam för smartphone   iphone ipad
 installationsguide för eduroam windows pc
 universitetslektor                        phd associate professordocent in business administration
 professor senior                        professor in welding technology
 intercultural work psychology fulltime campus pok101
 are you interested in a unique course amongst swedish colleges and universities where the basics of human psychology is studied from an intercultural perspective? for example how do personalities or intelligences differ between cultures? how big is the cultural effect on psychological mechanisms such as emotion thought and ability  particularly in the workplace? how much psychology do we have in common as human beings and how different are we across cultures? is there a way to measure the effect of culture in a workplace?
 the course is intended both for those who have experiences of other cultures and want to learn about the psychology behind this and for those who have psychological knowledge but want to broaden their cultural understanding. the combination of behavioral skills with knowledge in psychology and culture is increasingly sought after by employers and something that makes your particular profile to be extra attractive in the market.
 interference in our wireless networks.
 at the moment we have interference in our wireless networks.we are working to resolve the issue as quickly as possible.
 integradde  intelligent datadriven pipeline for the manufacturing of certified metal parts through direct energy deposition processes
 the industrialisation of manufacturing am requires a holistic data management and integrated automation. integradde aims to develop an endtoend digital manufacturing solution enabling a cybersecured bidirectional dataflow for a seamless integration across the entire am chain.
 the goal is to develop a new manufacturing methodology capable of ensuring the manufacturability reliability and quality of a target metal component from initial product design via direct energy deposition ded technologies implementing a zerodefect manufacturing approach ensuring robustness stability and repeatibility of the process.
 to achieve this aim integradde addresses following key innovations
 combination of automatic topology optimisation algorithms for design multiscale process modelling automated hardwareindependent process planning online control and distributed ndt for the manufacturing of certified metal parts.
 a selfadaptive control is adopted focused on the implementation of nonpropagation of defects strategy. moreover data analytics will provide a continuous refinement by acquiring process knowledge to assist in the manufacturing of new metal components improving rightfirsttime production by adopting a mass customization approach.
 cybersecurity ensures data integrity along the am workflow providing a novel manufacturing methodology for the certification of metal am parts.integradde implements a twofold deployment approach for the pilot lines both in applicationdriven at five industrial endusers steel tooling aeronautics and construction and openpilot networks at rtos already owning am infrastructure aimen irepa cea west. this will allow a continuous validation and deployment of specific developments towards industrialization boosting definitive uptake of am in eu metalworking sector.
 horizon 2020clean sky
 decoration and visibility on campus is one of the prioritised projects in the campus development.
 in order to create a good work and study environment our new premises on campus need to be furnished. we work together with white arkitekter to create an environment that is inviting and fit for purpose. in our work we pay particular attention to sustainability aspects and are constantly looking at what can be reused. the project will develop an interior design concept that applies to the entire campus.
 in addition to the interior design of our premises the project will also work to increase the visibility of the universitys core activities on campus. through efforts in the physical environment it will become clear what university west stands for and works with. the goal is to increase awareness among external visitors as well as the pride of staff and students.
 university west works continuously to develop international contacts. today we collaborate with more than 130 universities and institutions of higher education all over the world collaborations which continuously develop and increase.
 students from university west can apply for placement and studies abroad through agreements with foreign partner universities. we strive to create a window in our programmes to allow for a term abroad in order to avoid interruption in studies and instead incorporate the foreign study period. work integrated learning is also an important part of our programmes and placement opportunities are therefore a good way for students to combine the experience of being abroad with work experience increasing their chances in the labour market.
 international masters programmes
 university west offers international master programmes within several subject areas. the teaching language is english and the recruitment is global. we also offer a 3year programme in economics and international relations at bachelors level taught in english. incoming students from our partner universities are also able to participate in courses given within this programme. in some cases exchange students can complete a whole programme thereby obtaining a swedish bachelors degree.we have about 200 incoming students per year mainly from europe asia and africa. the majority of the incoming students arrive through exchange agreements. in addition to the above mentioned programmes and courses university west also offers an array of courses and course packages in english for incoming students.
 teacher exchanges create new contacts
 teacher exchanges aim to increase the individual teachers skill and ability but also to strengthen the universitys internationalization efforts. there is a longterm vision behind the exchange  it can be to further strengthen the bonds to a partner university or to facilitate student exchange to increase the understanding of the work conducted at the partner university to create new contacts or to develop new teaching materials together with foreign colleagues.
 the university has also through cooperation with the isep network access to more than 300 universities worldwide of which about 140 of these are located in the united states.
 university west has been granted erasmus charter for higher education 20142020 by the european commision the so called erasmus plus program.erasmus code s trollha01
 more information about the programme
 erasmus policy statement
 university west recognizes the importance of international cooperation. our ambition is to attain quality and multitude in our mobility activites in order to provide excellent possibilities for international experience and competence for both students and staff. we also strive to create a window in our programmes to allow for a semester abroad. this is done to avoid an interruption in the studies and instead incorporate the foreign studies.
 we strive for academically balanced partnerships and encourage those that offer a variety of collaborative opportunities. this enables us to improve quality and increase the scope and multitude of our international cooperation with heis and enterprises andor organisations. this also provide a wider range of mobility possibilities to teachers and staff.
 we also aim to extend collaboration to our chinese or indian partners but also other noneu heis in developed andor developing countries. as for geographic area collaborative possibilities corresponding to our objectives are more important than where the partner is located.
 together with a french partner university west offer a double degree. students from university west attend business courses at the partner institution and vice versa for two semesters during their last academic year on bachelors level. during this year they produce their thesis work and obtain a double degree. yet another double degree is under discussion that involves one of our noneu partner.
 we see participation in the eche programme as an essential factor to enable us to reach our goals set for internationalization.
 erasmus charter for higher education 20142020
 european university association
 university is a member of eua
 have dinner with us at the international office this event is for all of you who study at university west
 any student who is interested in going abroad or is abroad here at university west is welcome
 here you can get help with your erasmus application or simply get inspired about where other students go abroad or where our international students come from
 restaurant västan offers a taco buffet for 79 sek and we from the international office will be there to answer questions or simply tell you about your possibilities to study abroad or gather work experience abroad.
 we are very excited to see you there
 date? wednesday the 14th of february
 the world that emerged from world war ii was one in which trade financial and communication links between countries were limited. one decade into the 21st century however the picture is very different. globalization has arrived big time. international trade in goods and services has expanded steadily thanks to globally negotiated reduction in government trade barriers and the declines in shipping and communication costs. international trade in financial assets such as currencies stocks and bonds has expanded at a much faster pace. there are also risks with the globalization since problems in one part of the world can spread like a contagion to other parts perhaps with no country immune. this raises a number of questions what are the merits and problems of free trade among nations compared with protectionism? what causes countries to run trade surpluses and deficits and how are such imbalances resolved? studying ways to answer these and other related questions is at the heart of this course.
 the purpose of this course is to equip students and future business leaders with the analytical tools they need to understand the sources of risks that arise in international financial markets and how these risks can be managed in todays competitive global environment. it mixes theory data analysis examples and practical case situations to allow students to understand international financial decisionmaking.
 international law and organizations fulltime campus iro100
 this course is an overview of the legal and political forces that constitute international organizations including international courts. theoretical approaches to international law and organizations as well as their day to day practices are covered including the case law of particular international courts.
 the course is examined by written assignments following academic requirements and guidelines and individual presentations at seminars.
 bachelor degree of 180 he credits with 90 he credits in the major subject area of business administration or equivalent.
 international marketing parttime campus imd900
 the overall aim of the course is to equip students with solid knowledge and skills in the international marketing subject area in order to help them in undertaking and developing their international careers. the course is designed in a way to help students learn understand and practice elements of the international marketing strategy process with a strong focus on its sustainability aspect. the process involves the analysis of a situation development of a strategy against a background of a number of strategic options and the implementation of the chosen options. the course is divided into three main subject areas analysis strategy development and implementation.
 part 1 focuses on the analysis of the international marketing environment. it provides an introduction to how the international marketing environment influences the way firms operate.
 part 2 explains the international marketing strategy options available for small mediumsized and large companies that will enable them to compete effectively in global markets.
 part 3 deals with the international communication distribution and pricing strategies that support the introduction and development of the business in the various worldwide markets. a special focus in the course is pit on sustainable marketing practices.
 the course is examined via a course project performed in small groups and presented and discussed at the final seminar as well as written exam.
 international masters programme in work integrated political science
 a collaboration between university west in sweden and university of the western cape in south africa.
 collaboration partnerspublic institutions and ngos in sweden and south africa
 maria asuncion valiente bermejo  international mechanical engineering preparing students for a future not yet written
 international mechanical engineering preparing students for a future not yet written
 a multidisciplinary approach
 this is a new concept for a mechanical engineering program maria asuncion valiente bermejo shares. our program aims to prepare students for a future that is not yet written.
 by offering a solid foundation in mathematics and mechanics combined with many other diverse courses the program equips students with the necessary skills and adaptability to thrive in an everchanging engineering landscape. this multidisciplinary approach is not often found in engineering programs.
 i would say that this is quite unique maria asuncion valiente bermejo notes. when you look into other programs you see that they usually are much more focused on one specific area.reflecting on the industrys needs maria asuncion valiente bermejo shares that the intention is to provide the companies with multidisciplinary engineers. and that this is something that is in high demand. if you have knowledge on many different areas that can boost your employability she says. by nurturing a broad knowledge base and interdisciplinary skills graduates are wellprepared for diverse roles within the industry or to continue their studies on masters level but more on that later.
 at university west collaboration with industry is not just a buzzword its an integral part of the program. as you progress through the program youll have the chance to engage with companies through for example guest lectures collaborative projects and company visits. to further foster practical skills maria asuncion valiente bermejo explains that we also use software that is the same software used by professionals at these companies.
 these interactions with companies and practical experiences provide students with realworld perspectives and a competitive edge.
 the program offers multiple pathways forward for students who graduate. after finishing their studies they can either go straight to work in the industry or they can continue as master students explains maria asuncion valiente bermejo. with a solid foundation in mathematics and mechanics youll lay the groundwork for a successful career whether you choose to enter the industry directly or pursue further studies at the masters level. to ensure that the students have the option to pursue advanced studies the program offers the required courses enabling admission to masters programs either at university west or at other universities.
 are you ready to embark on an educational adventure? choose the international mechanical engineering program at university west and unlock your full potential as a future innovator and engineer
 read more about the program
 international memberships and networks
 information about international networks and membership in which university west participates.
 iau international association of universities
 eua european university assosiation
 wace world ass. of cooperative education
 sanord southern africa nordic center
 iaeste international association for the exchange of students for technical experience
 eaie european association of international education
 international networks
 information about international networks and memberships in which university west participates.
 eaie european association of international education  individual memberships
 the strategic internationalisation council sir works to strategically develop and coordinate internationalisation work at the university. read more about sir.
 kontakt  international office
 opening hours at service center at the beginning of autumn semester 2024
 from 19 august until 23 august         monday  friday 11.00  13.00from 26 august until 13 september  monday  thursday 08.00  16.30                                                                        friday 08.00  16.00from 16 september until 4 october   monday  friday 10.00  14.00
 opening hours via telephonemonday  thursday 08.00  16.30friday 08.00  16.00closed for lunch 12.0013.00 and closes at 14.00 on mondays.
 international perspectives on industrial restructuring
 international perspectives on management control systems fulltime campus ipe700
 the course international perspectives on management control systems focusses on national differences in design and use of management control systems. it deals with intended and unintended effects of individual control tools and how these tools form complete control systems. thereafter it presents and problematizes how management control systems can be designed and used in different nation contexts with a specific interest in societal institutions and national culture.
 bachelor degree of 180 he credits with 90 he credits in business administration or equivalent.
 international politics and globalization fulltime campus ipa100
 this is an introduction course in political science focusing on international politics and international relations. with a starting point in real international affairs the course presents and discusses different perspectives of international politics and relations.
 you also need mathematics 2a or mathematics 2b or mathematics 2c social studies 1b or social studies 1a1 1a2
 international programme in politics and economics ippe
 mobility period possible during 5th semester of studies.  exchange studies at partner universities see below
 internship abroad  erasmus internshipinformation on application
 studies within eu  erasmusmasaryk university czech republicthe hague university of applied sciences the netherlandsulster university united kingdom
 studies outside euuniversity of the western cape uwc south africasan josé state university sjsu united statescentral university of technology cut south africamount royal university canadataylors university malaysia
 studies within eu  erasmusernstmoritzarndtuniversität greifswald germanylazarski university polandmatej bel university in banska bystrica slovakia
 studies outside eucentral queensland university australiashanghai university chinalingnan university hongkong chinakonkuk university korea republic oftaylors university malaysiaprovidence university taiwan
 international visit at university west
 last week university west received an international visit from 4 higher education institutions around the world. vietnam national university the belgian vives university of applied sciences and from thailand the pim institute of technology and rangsit university.
 the visit is part of an ongoing strategic effort to create better opportunities for programme students at the department of engineering science to be able to study abroad during their studies.
 during the visit our international guests were shown around university wests campus and trollhättan. another part of the tour was a visit to the production technology centre to take better look at the facilities and operations at the lab. also our gests got to visit the swedish companies volvo and skf who university west have a long going collaboration with.
 read more about the possibilities for studies aborad at the department of engineering science.
 internationalisation through digital education
 a digitalisation project to develop an international collaborative educational environment between university west uw  university of the western cape uwc.
 one of the key changes in the academic landscape over the past decades has been the spread of web based learning facilities. these have the potential to make academic studies more flexible and easily available to students if supported by appropriate pedagogical administrative social and economic educational systems. an increasingly diverse student body display challenges for the higher education institutions. for example an increasing group of learners are deficient in their cognitive academic language proficiency which need to be properly addressed and solved to provide a sufficient knowledge base for future societal development. also the student body is increasingly multiculturally diverse. instead of being viewed as a problem this multicultural diversity can with proper pedagogical tools be a strength and resource in the internationalisation of higher education. based on previous experiences and building on the established international collaboration between uw  uwc this project will primarily aim to achieve the following goals
 develop a digital educational collaborative platform and thereto connected digital tools suitable to implement a simultaneously organised international education programme including students from the north  south.
 thereto develop suitable pedagogical tools and curriculum that provides appropriate contextual support for learners with a diversified educational and cultural background to develop their conceptually demanding theoretical synthesising and abstracting abilities.
 enhance multicultural understanding and knowledge sharing through international educational collaborative environment favouring students as well as academic staff in the south  north.
 dr sherran clarence rhodes universityassociate professor fiona anciano university of the western cape
 masaryk university tjeckienliuc università cattaneo italienfontys university of applied scineces nederländerna
 hi everyone my name is ester bukor i am 24 years old and currently studying human resources management with a focus on work and organizational psychology at university west. i was an exchange student at konkuk university in seoul during the fall term 2020. this trip gave me the opportunity to meet a new culture and language and to learn more about other people and religions. it was the best decision i ever made and i spent some amazing months in south korea. i met wonderful people and got influenced in many ways by this amazing country that is so different from sweden. i collected some of my best memories in this video hope you enjoy it
 all the bestester
 exchange possibilites at department of engineering science
 study abroad for one or two semesters attend a summer school or do an internshipthesis workcoop at one of our partner universities or companies.
 options for exchange studies
 option 1 apply for a semester of exchange studies abroad within your programme without extending the study duration. see recommended partners for specific programmes listed below.
 option 2summer school or short course  see list of opportunities on our web page for summer schools and short courses.
 option 3you may also be able to do coop thesis work or internship abroad at a partner university or company. you can find some of the opportunities through the organisation iaeste. you can register yourself at the website and apply for the interesting opportunities directly. for other opportunities and more information contact internship abroad coordinator roy andersson
 option 4regardless of which programme you are studying there is also the possibility to do an exchange period abroad for one or two semesters directly after you have finished your programme studies provided you do not apply for your degree until you have completed the stay abroad.this applies to erasmus internship and overseas studies at partner universities  not erasmus studies.
 it is possible to choose or combine several options above.
 masters programmesmanufacturing engineeringoperations managementrobotics and automation
 read more about other students experiences from their exchange studies abroad
 exchange possibilities at school of business economics and it
 the opportunity to gain an international perspective during university studies is for us a prioritized and natural approach to higher education. during your studies you should in various ways gain an insight into similarities and differences between individuals and cultures in different countries and an understanding of this.
 depending on what programme you are studying at you have different options listed below. if you have the ability within your programme to do a semester of studies abroad you can find a list of recommended partner universities for specific study programmes linked at the bottom of this page.
 option 3regardless of which programme you are studying there is also the possibility to do an exchange period abroad for one or two semesters directly after you have finished your programme studies provided you do not apply for your degree until you have completed the stay abroad applies to overseas studie and erasmu internhip  not erasmus studies.
 bachelors programmesinternational programme in politics and economicsbachelor of science programme in business and economicssystems development  it and society3d animation and visualizationdigital mediabroker economists program real estate and finance
 masters programmessustainable developmentleadership in digitalised organisationswork integrated political studies
 do you want to come to sweden springsemester 2025 and build a normlab?
 apply to normconsciousness and health 6075 ects credits
 an erasmus grant from your home university to support travel and accommodation is available for students participating in the course
 read more about the course below
 flyer inbjudan till apply to normconsciousness and health 6075 he credits.pdf
 learn the basics of 22 languages with the online language support
 certificate of international merits  cim
 spv internationalisering
 manufacturing is undergoing a shift from isolated optimised cells in factories to fully integrated systems. traditional mechanical engineering programmes no longer prepare engineers to meet the needs of industry. factories of the future require mechanical engineers with multidisciplinary backgrounds. in this programme you will build knowledge in areas such as manufacturing processes materials science robotics and automation electric vehicles and supply chain management.
 factory systems are currently in transition from isolated optimized cells where employees perform repetitive tasks to fully integrated systems. this means companies are in need of engineers who understand the whole supply chain. your programme prepares you for the current and future needs of industry where engineers with multidisciplinary backgrounds are required.
 companies are also looking for engineers with international interpersonal skills to improve effectiveness in global operations  an additional component of this programme. on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or further advanced studies.
 after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad.
 industriell placering
 eaie european association of international education  individuella medlemskap
 do you want to develop and run projects across cultural and national borders? through studies in political science economics and global social analysis the programme provides you with experience working with the investigation interinstitutional cooperation and advisory within international organizations public agencies and crossborder business  both in sweden and abroad.
 globalisation increasingly challenges our traditional understanding of political and economic decisionmaking and practices. the international programme in politics and economics ippe at university west is an open creative interdisciplinary thinking space exploring the intersections between politics and economics in multiple issue areas and various sites across different world regions. ippe is primarily concerned to link academic enquiry with policy and other workintegrated learning practices. the programmes vision is provoked by real world situations and a wish to produce knowledge that contributes to a better understanding of global challenges. ippe is intellectually pluralist and is not a project with a single line of aims questions theories and methods but more a conversation and crossfertilisation among diverse approaches. this threeyear multidisciplinary bachelors programme taught entirely in english is the only one of its kind in sweden. gain theoretical knowledge and practical skills for positions in public administration nonprofits and private corporations. studying this international programme also gives you opportunities to work and further your studies inside or outside sweden.
 ippe is the only international multidisciplinary programme in sweden that offers a bachelors degree in politics and economics taught entirely in english. students and staff come from across the globe which gives your programme a truly international multicultural study environment and a vibrant stimulating student life.
 ippe cooperates with universities in europe africa the usa australia and asia. we also have special bilateral agreements with the university of the western cape in cape town south africa and san josé state university in california usa for staff and student exchanges. students can study or hold an internship abroad in europe or any other continent or stay in sweden  it is your choice. the latter prepares students for professional work across national and cultural borders to develop implement and lead political and economicoriented projects.
 as an ippe student you will gain experiences both inside and outside the classroom. your programme gives you easy access to academic faculty and encourages your growth academically professionally socially emotionally and ethically. in addition to providing relevant knowledge and skills ippe prepares you to support cultural diversity and consider issues of gender equality and sustainability in the work you do. the focus on wil work integrated learning allows you to put your knowledge and skills into practice within realworld contexts including projects and the possibility to do an internship.
 with the ippe bachelors degree you can apply for further studies at the postgraduate level within political science or related fields in sweden or internationally. university west also offers a natural continuation of your postgraduate studies in the form of a twoyear international masters programme in work integrated political studies wips. the programme is a joint venture with the university of the western cape in south africa given entirely in english. wips focuses on applied politicaleconomic studies conducted in close collaboration with civil society. upon completing the wips masters programme you are qualified to apply for phd studies within work integrated learning at university west.
 nowadays more and more companies large and small responding to global development and competition get involved in business operations outside their countries of origin. this type of expansion requires professional knowledge in the field of international business.
 international learning environment
 your programme is fully taught in english. both students and staff are coming from different parts of the world europe asia africa north and south america giving you an enriching experience relevant to your future in international business. additionally all disciplines youll study are put in an international context. youll be prepared to engage on an international level academically socially and culturally for work in the field.
 university west is swedens leading university when it comes to work integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continues to lead the field today. wil in your programme gives you an opportunity to identify and solve reallife problems faced by international companies in the global business environment using a scientific approach.
 professional career
 as a graduate youll be equipped with the skills needed to operate across borders cultures industries and functions. the range of career options available to you is broad. recent graduates have been employed by large multinationals management consultancy companies and banks as well as small companies taking their first steps toward international markets.
 examples of entry positions for graduates of this programme include but are not limited to marketing managers sales managers communication professionals consultants and business analysts.
 after graduating from the master in international business you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at other universities in sweden or abroad.
 grundare till exportstiftelsen itm worldwide foundation
 university west has taught me a lot
 alumnus from south africa
 the programme helped me develop my critical and systematic thinking.
 take the opportunity to gain international experience during your internship
 opportunities for internships look a bit different depending on which programme you study. some programmes are open for elective courses during the fifth semester. this is an excellent opportunity for you to do an internship abroad. if your programme looks different discuss what opportunities there are for you with your study counselor.
 erasmus for internship period within euerasmus internship is an exchange programme that gives you the opportunity to carry out an internship at a company or organization in another country within euees. you will receive a scholarship to have an internship between two and twelve months. you can also apply for erasmus internship scholarship if you plan on doing your thesis work at a company in another european country. nb you cannot receive this scholarship for a placement position at any of the offices of the eu commission  as this is where the funding originates from.
 there is also the possibility to do an internship after you graduate within one year after your studies have been completed.
 read more about erasmus internship
 internship through iaeste iaeste sweden is a nonprofit organization that mediates internships in over 80 countries primarily in the fields of technology science and architecture. their internship can be from 2 to 18 months long. the internships are suitable for students who study at the university level regardless of which year. in some cases it can be combined with a thesis work.from september 2024 iaeste offers travel grants. the scholarship is sek 1000 per journey if you go by train  or other environmentally friendly mode of transport  to andor from your destination. if you are traveling outside of europe iaeste also offers a travel grant of sek 3000  regardless of the mode of travel  to cover parts of the higher costs involved.
 read more about iaeste
 going abroad gives you the opportunity to broaden your knowledge and increase your understanding of different cultures and perspectives.
 study a semester at one of our partner universities
 application round for spring semester studies 2025 open  apply before 10th september
 information sessions
 thursday 1 of february 2024 1215  1300lunchinformation on exchange studies via zoomlink will be published here in mid january
 tuesday the 21 maj 2024 1300  1400information booth outside restaurant västan come and meet us learn more about your options or ask questions you may have about exchange studies.
 wednesday the 22 may 2024 1215  1300lunchinformation on exchange studies via zoomlink will be published here in the beginning of may
 tuesday the 10 september 2024 1300  1400information booth outside restaurant västan come and meet us learn more about your options or ask questions you may have about exchange studies.
 wednesday the 11 september 2024 1215  1300lunchinformation on exchange studies through zoomlink to the webinar wednesday 11 september
 tuesday the 12 december 1300  1400information booth outside restaurant västan come and meet us learn more about your options or ask questions you may have about exchange studies.
 wednesday the 13 december 1230  1300lunchinformation on exchange studies via zoom
 10 septemberexchange studies  last date of application for remaining seats at partneruniversities within euees erasmus programme and outside overseas.you can apply for studies starting upcoming spring semester only.
 1 december deadline for application to the isep programme application opens 1 november 2024link to online application isep 15 februaryexchange studies  last date for application to partneruniversities within euees erasmus programme and outside overseas.you can apply for studies starting upcoming autumn semester andor spring semester.link to online application will be published here 15 december 2024
 15 march  late applicationexchange studies  last date for late application to partneruniversities within euees erasmus programme and outside overseas.you can apply for studies starting upcoming autumn semester andor spring semester.link to online application will be pulished here 16th february 2025how to apply erasmus and overseas
 apply for internship through iaeste no deadline oncoingyou have the possibility to apply for placement abroad through iaeste directly to iaeste.
 summer schools and short courses
 we update these web pages whenever we receive new information
 go to information page on available summer schools and short courses
 find information specific to your department and programme.
 whenwhere can i go abroad?
 selection criteria
 prior to the exchange
 find contact information to the international office and your department coordinator.
 i would always encourage others to do it
 human resources  work and organizational psychology
 one of the most valuable experiences...
 during his industrial engineering  management studies at university west william arkemar went on an exchange to lyon france. reflecting on his trip william expresses this is one of the most valuable experiences so far in my adult life it was very enriching in so many ways. it was also one of the most fun experiences totally unforgettable
 william arkemar france
 i also met so many kind people in namibia
 read all interviews here
 internships at university west
 internship meetup at university west
 for the second time university west and employment service arbetsförmedlingen arranged a common internship meetup. the background for the meetup is the government assignment trainee in government agencies where authorities have the mission of providing internships.beatrice löfström coordinates work with internships at university west. she says this autumn the university offers 58 internships and they are placed throughout the university including the library the administration and our departments. based on the internships offered employment service arbetsförmedlingen has matched profiles from the target groups and these candidates have been invited to the meetup.during the meetup approximately 40 people were invited by via the employment service arbetsförmedlingen and folkuniversitetetkorta vägen. most of them came from trollhättan and vänersborg but there were also some engineers from åmål. they received information about university west and were booked for short interviews with representatives from the university.this is a useful experience from job seekers viewpoint as it allows networking presenting themselves at an interview receiving feedback on their cv and the opportunity to meet student counsellor. the internship is an important experience that creates good conditions for getting jobs as it provides experience from both specific tasks and working at a government agency says beatrice.shared their experiencesnour almardoud and michelle nahhas both from syria did internship at the university west during the fall  winter 20162017 and are currently working at the employment service arbetsförmedlingen. they participated during the internship meetup and shared their experience about the way to get the first job in sweden.i am a qualified lawyer and during the internship i was supervised by the lawyer at the university. for example i worked on examining agreements. i learned among others how the legal system in sweden works. when i accepted the internship i did not know exactly what it would lead to but i discovered that the internship actually led to job says michelle.nour who was educated as an electrical engineer in her native country interned at the university as a teaching assistant in the engineering programmes.i learned the occupational vocabulary in swedish that was most important to me she says. then i got the chance to work at the employment service arbetsförmedlingen. its cool to be there.a necessary cooperationboth university west and employment service arbetsförmedlingen are very positive about the cooperation between them.its a necessary collaboration we have candidates and university has internships. if we do this correctly there will be quality internships that can provide work later. it should be the right place for the right individual.the university has a good basic structure regarding the work of receiving trainees so it is easy for us to collaborate says mikaela halleröd from employment service arbetsförmedlingen.it is a learning of professional language and an opportunity to gain experience irena bliznac from employment service arbetsförmedlingen points out.
 nour almardoud and michelle nahhas both did their internship at university west.
 the government has asked all staterun institutions to provide placement for newcomers to sweden looking for work as well as people with a disability that affects their ability to work. this mandate is commonly called placement through the state.
 the assignment has been extended until december 31 2023.
 the assignment from the government means that each authority shall map and find opportunities to take in trainees make internships available to the employment service arbetsförmedlingen as well as report the number of internships and plans for the state office. the employment service helps with the matching of trainees in dialogue with the employer.
 since spring 2016 university west has offered internships for the two target groups and also offered internships for asylum seekers via the migration boards internship program and via the folkuniversitetets program korta vägen.
 the internships provide the trainee with knowledge and experience of working at a government authority an extended contact network and the opportunity to develop skills in swedish for new arrivals  all are important aspects for a future job.
 for more information in english and other languages please follow the link
 in english swedish agency for government employers
 an unexpected error has occurred. please contact servicecenter if the issue remains.
 interruption in network traffic
 at the moment we have interruption in the network traffic
 volvos propulsion solution management expert caroline kjellin on electromechanical vehicle engineering
 caroline kjellin leads volvos electric propulsion development and is playing a key role in the companys ambitious goal of having 50 pure electric cars by 2025.
 what are some recent developments in electrical systems within the automotive industry?
 development for our pure electric car is moving extremely fast. we are currently moving to inhouse design of electric machines and battery packs. our product portfolio is growing swiftly.
 how do you feel university wests program in electric vehicle engineering fits into this?
 when we hire mechanical engineers were looking for competencies in battery cell chemistry power electronics electric machine development software etc.
 the master in mechanical engineering  electric vehicle engineering is a very good way to give students a strong base so they may come to work on electric car development focusing on electric machine development. it provides a broad base of knowledge.
 volvo cars is a very peopleoriented company. we focus a lot on sustainability making sure our products are personal. we also care about the people who work here making sure our products and working climate live up to our extremely high standards.
 its exciting work. its an extremely fastmoving marking in terms of development. there are new technologies coming out all the time. if you want to work at the forefront of technology this is definitely an area where you want to work.
 how is the job outlook at volvo for graduates of this programme?
 the benefit of a more specialised programme like this is that the electric car development market is extremely big. volvo is to have 50 pure electric cars on the market by 2025. this is the future. picking this programme you have the possibility to get yourself a profile that will fit right into the needs of the auto industry.
 we are always looking for bright new people to hire. we are constantly growing. of course international cultural competency and english language ability are also important. we have a diverse workforce and are building diverse teams.
 interview with mengting xie  alumna from china
 i currently work as an engineer and am the operational process development  system solution architect at national electric vehicle sweden nevs in trollhättan. during a typical working day i get into the office early to go through my todo checklist in onenote in order to prioritize things i should do for the day. during the early morning our team always has a short stand up meeting to communicate about the following questions
 what we did yesterday?
 what we will do today?
 what blocks us from maintaining our progress?
 as an agile organization we have adapted our way of working to share our progress help each other and react faster to changes.
 i work on multiple assignments during a day such as process development process communication business system development and maintenance itrelated project and support new platform training as well as communication with and support of chinese colleagues.
 recently i started focusing more on developing a system solution to visualize the agile organization new business management process and project deliverables. therefore i continuously need to talk with our internal clients about their needs and feedback for the solution. im having meetings with clients to show the solution demo and receive inputfeedback for 60 of the day. thirty percent of the day is left to actually work on the system solution and to prepare for the next demonstration. and 10 of the day is to quickly go through my email inbox and support tickets from it.
 for itrelated projects sometimes i could spend a whole day trying out third part tools communicating with a third party tool supplier. and also there will be some days to test new platforms or webbased solutions create instructions and promote it to the whole organization.
 my working day is full of exciting assignments. i really enjoy my job a lot
 why did you choose the master in international business at university west?
 i actually came to university west as an exchange student as part of my bachelors programme at the shanghai institute of technology. after my exchange year in trollhättan i wanted to continue my studies at university west so i applied for the oneyear master in international business and luckily i was granted a scholarship.
 how did your studies at university west prepare you for business life?
 the knowledge i acquired during my studies at university west helped me develop my critical and systematic thinking. i learned to see things from different angles and to position my working goals from a different perspective. the marketing and communication knowledge i got from the master in international business helps me to better promote and communicate my ideas and work for internal and external consumers.
 during my studies i learned a lot from selfstudy and teamwork experience. it makes me a more independent person in doing my working assignment and at the same time i become a teamdriven person when doing projects that require cooperation with crossfunctional people. it also made me more flexible to understand and accept new things happening in the workplace.
 the university also provides a lot of opportunities for students to communicate with local companies. i connected with several companies during some company exhibitions at university west.
 why do you think a future student should choose university west?
 the professors at university west are friendly and approachable they always give inspiration and good advice.
 you will be amazed by the diversity of the programmes and courses the university can provide.
 the facilities here in university are advanced and accessible especially for students who study engineering.
 the university organizes a lot of interesting activities that the students can participate in.
 the university provides you with the opportunity to build up contact with companies
 you will learn a lot by studying in groups or teams which provides you with a great environment to experience how to collaborate with people. this is very useful in the real workplace.
 do you have any advice for future students?
 prepare for challenges  any assignment from a course could be quite a challenge be prepared to take it and do a good job.
 be a good team player  enjoy the group work and communicate with your group members. the main thing is to plan and help each other thus to get a good outcome and course experience.
 work hard  have perseverance and always keep your goal in mind focus on what you want to achieve during the study. because this makes you more likely to get the reward at the end.
 utilize the available resources  communicate more with professors you will reach a new vision in studying through their words of wisdom. time is the cheapest but most priceless resource for you.
 enjoy fika time  meet your friends classmates and professors and enjoy the coffee break when you feel stressed during your studies.
 why did you choose the master in finance at university west?
 when i applied for the master in finance i already had extensive experience in finance mostly in banking. so from that experience it was a logical step to continue studying a masters programme in the field of finance. what attracted me most in the programme at university west was that it was a 1year programme only and the subjects that are taught.
 how did you experience your studies at university west?
 all the subjects were relevant interesting and challenging. moreover i think this programme is a good basis for preparation for the cfa exam  the most prestigious certification for financial analysts.
 the academic staff on this programme are well qualified can grab the audiences attention and can explain complicated things. very kind supportive and interesting people. any feedback or request is responded to quickly.
 the programme at university west is very well organized. the universitys online student systems disco and canvas provide accurate support and help with planning my studies.
 i really liked the modern and stylish architecture on the universitys campus. everything is easily accessible for everybody through automated doors and elevators. the buildings are very spacious clean with modern furniture and equipped with kitchens and study rooms. i really love the modern design
 how would you describe the university culture?
 what i really liked was everybodys willingness to help and support. besides that i experienced that teachers had a real desire to teach and mentor students. i felt there was a cooperation with staff instead of them being controlling or commanding which i was used to at my previous university.
 i am planning to work and live in sweden. it would be great to learn more about the working culture in sweden. i am also considering taking the cfa exam because my programme has given me a solid knowledge to pass the cfa levels 1 and 2 successfully. also ill continue to study the swedish language i enjoy it.
 interview with associate professor vahid hosseini on international mechanical engineering
 associate professor vahid hosseini on international mechanical engineering
 what makes this bachelor in international mechanical engineering different from other bachelors programmes?
 most mechanical engineering programmes are more traditional. in this programme we are combining different areas of expertise for a more multidisciplinary approach including robotics manufacturing electric vehicles and materials science. normally bachelorlevel engineering students dont get to explore these areas.
 our programme is also broader and more flexible when it comes to finding jobs. graduates are qualified in areas such as mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering automation engineering and materials science engineering.
 why is this programme important?
 the future of production has changed. more sustainable production and fabrication is needed. this means that incoming engineers must have complimentary expertise that others might not have. in fact the industry is currently firing many more traditional engineers because of this changing landscape. its further accelerated by the covid19 crisis. traditional engineers will be replaced by those who are more flexible  such as graduates of this programme.
 furthermore the industrial system in sweden is highly international. many multinational companies are based nearby. there is a need for international specialists with multidisciplinary backgrounds. at university west we now have an entire chain of programmes from bachelor through phd and beyond to support this.
 things are developing so rapidly within community printing and 3d printing aerospace industries robotics and automation the role of human interaction fabrication techniques etc.
 what are some interesting projects going on now at university west?
 what type of students will find this programme most interesting?
 if you have the really big goal to influence the production of the future globally  if you want to have lots of choice  this programme will interest you.
 interview with jonas johansson  alumnus from sweden
 why did you apply to university west?
 did the programme meet your expectations?
 it started off the way i thought it would and then it expanded into new subjects and i never really expected that there would be so much i needed to learn as i knew people who did the same programme earlier. but on the whole it was much more interesting than i anticipated.
 what is the most exciting thing you have done during your studies for example any specific course project internship etc.? tell us about that.
 work integrated learning. this can be a valuable experience both in a good and bad sense but all experiences like this were good to have when getting out in realworld it companies. for example we were in contact with a company where that person had no idea what product was needed. this gave us the chance to help that company to figure out its needs and desires to be able to provide the service they intended to. this made the planned assignment of programming change more of a documentation and reallife scenario of the many roles within it.
 its a centrally located area in trollhättan where the culture is friendly and people are considerate. the environment while studying is what you want it to be. you can be outside in the park or inside in a quiet room. the teachers are welcoming if you have questions or issues during the day when they are in their offices which makes it feel more genuine like you have a connection when they can talk openly with you. there are plenty of rooms and places to sit and study or just have a chat with friends when having a coffee.
 what do you think about student life in trollhättan?
 i myself have been active in student life and can wholeheartedly say that its very nice and there are many students who want to make plans to do things in their spare time. so whatever one wants to do there are always people who want to join in. and though the city may be small its not far from gothenburg for bigger events and exploring. but there are still weekly pub events and other means of gathering on campus.
 i play games organize student events and try to teach my cats to do highfives the latter is the biggest challenge yet. but other than that since i live with my fiancé we try to do road trips and spend time with other students that we have become friends with over the years.
 i am actually moving to the east coast of sweden for a job that i was offered as my fiancé is from that area. i plan to spend a few years learning as much as possible while contributing as best i can. after that i want to study part time to advance my knowledge of how to lead and take on bigger assignments and advance within the organization. there is so much time to spend on work so why not spread it out by studying and hopefully well have a bigger family one day.
 how do you think studying here at university west and your programme can help you to reach your goals?
 well this position wouldnt have been possible without these studies but also this university and this programme are held in high regard among many companies which makes it a perfect thing to talk about when at interviews. the programme actually has many variations to suit what you want to become and learn more about by way of various courses it is possibile to work at a company during the term and such. and to be honest the teachers motivated me to learn more and the whole experience made me want to continue my studies so who knows maybe ill be back for that masters in a few years.
 interview with professor per assmo about work integrated political studies
 professor per assmo about work integrated political studies
 per assmo is professor at university west sweden and extraordinary professor at the university of the western cape south africa. as one of his main academic duties he is the programme director for the international masters programme in work integrated political studies.
 what makes this programme different from other masters programmes?
 this programme is unique in several ways. the programme is a genuine international collaboration between university west and university of the western cape where senior academics from sweden south africa work together in the programme. grounded in the multidisciplinary field of work integrated learning wil the programme focuses on  political studies including important questions such as migration segregation human rights equality environment poverty democracy and conflicts embedded in new ways of creating learning knowledge and skills.
 why this programme?
 apart from providing a masters degree that enables you to apply for doctoral studies in wiork integrated learning and other fields  the programme also give a unique international education which combines theoretical knowledge with relevant skills. the programme conducted in close collaboration civil society also provides you with experience and networks relevant for the future work market in national and international organisations public institutions companies as well as ngos.
 for which students could this be an interesting programme?
 interview with dr. esmaeil sadeghi on metal additive manufacturing
 what makes this programme different from other additive manufacturing am programmes?
 the advanced equipment we have available makes a great difference. our production technology centre has the largest and newest manufacturing labs in sweden. some of the latest am equipment for monitoring and testing is here. not so many universities around the world have these resources.
 furthermore the programme includes an optional industry placement in europe asia or south america to increase the professional experience and network of students. students can combine the industry placement course with their thesis if they desire for an incompany experience of 612 months. this is a very good period for students to make their own connections within the industry and build their own future for their career.
 larger universities may not be able to offer this high level of integration with industry.
 why does the programme choose to focus on metal additive manufacturing?
 our university is located within one of the most engineeringdense regions of the country and is linked with these major companies gkn aerospace nevs cevt volvo and arcamebm to name a few. there is a great demand from these companies to train engineers in this field.
 why is this programme important to the industry?
 am is seen as one of the main advancements in manufacturing right now. the field is developing very quickly. every month you see new materials new machines  its staggering.
 at university west we keep the pace with this industry. swedish companies have been very engaged in developing and remaining active in this programme. they are involved in the programme as a whole down to each course where they facilitate workshops guest lecturers company visits and so on.
 of course students with a bachelor in materials science mechanical engineering or manufacturing engineering will be interested to deepen their knowledge in this area. it will be particularly well suited to those interested in international and creative environments  either international students who hope to work in swedish industry or swedish students who aim to sharpen their multicultural skills.
 students in this programme will start a project defined by a supervisor from industry and academia but they will also design and lead a project of their own. this gives them the opportunity to be creative. for example one student might come up with an aerospace application leading the project starting from design and including the materials manufacturing process etc. there are so many possibilities in this field.
 interview with yunus emre zafer  student from turkey
 why did you choose the master in manufacturing engineering at university west?
 i was determined to broaden my horizons in the manufacturing industry as i had 4 years of experience in this particular field. the diverse cultures and student city appealed to me as well since i hail from a humble background therefore having an affordable lifestyle in this specific city drew me to apply to this university. the facilities and opportunities that the university provides for students really attracted my attention.
 i am grateful that i had the opportunity to attend several seminars as well as make industry visits. as an audiovisual learner this really accelerated my learning curve. during my studies i spent a lot of time working on handson projects at the production technology center ptc. ptc offered substantial opportunities for networking which has opened some doors for me. i challenge future students to seize opportunities such as these to make lasting impressions on companies by conducting topnotch projects and experiments to stand out in the pool of prospective materials engineers
 how would you describe student life?
 aside from being diverse life as a student in a laidback city is conducive to habitation. all if not most social amenities are within the city or a bus ride away. there are some affordable shops i.e. general household stores and secondhand shops that are student friendly hence making the cost of living bearable in one of the countries with the strongest economy in europe.
 i am a little nerdy when it comes to speed therefore i immerse myself into the fascinating world of formula one. one of the key indicators that i needed to be in this field is the precision in which components are produced via additive manufacturing and analyzed with finite element analysis which is right up my alley i am also passionate about the arts so during my downtime i indulge in lots of renaissance films as well as the simple art of guitar playing.
 what are your future plans?
 my competence in the manufacturing field will enable me to explore the endless possibilities in highperformance metals which is the area my masters thesis is based on. to be aligned with an international company in this industry that promotes innovation and infrastructural success would propel me to achieve selfactualization as well as my professional goals.
 interview with akshay sarode  alumnus from india
 akshay sarode  alumnus from india
 i work at virtual manufacturing ab in gothenburg sweden as a robotics consultant. i usually start work at around 800. most of the days work starts with receiving critical challenges from a client. then my colleagues and i brainstorm around the solutions and start working on methodology. i work with biw process planning as well as robot  plc programming.
 why did you choose the master in robotics and automation at university west?
 university west was a good choice for me because of the balanced course structure which involves a combination of theory and handson projects. the universitys learningbydoing approach helped me to foresee realtime challenges which can occur in an industrial environment. handson projects with robots and programme logic control plc helped me to understand the bigger picture of the complete process. also the very wellequipped production technology center ptc helped me to test my knowledge with equipment instantly.
 nevs energy systems expert jose guerrero on electric vehicle engineering
 jose guerrero is chapter leader of energy systems at nevs in trollhättan a producer of electric vehicles and transportation solutions working to shape mobility for a sustainable future.
 can you introduce nevs to our students?
 nevs stands for national electric vehicle sweden. we are a thoughtleading member of the automotive industry with international roots. our work and concepts go beyond the electric car to include creative mobility solutions for a better world.
 nevs was founded in 2012 by kai johan jiang a swedish citizen originally from china. before founding nevs jiang built the largest biomass power business in china using straw an unwanted byproduct of farmers in the chinese countryside.
 this commitment to clean energy and sustainability has served well in the founding and development of nevs which is also highly international. we acquired the assets of the us company saab and are now owned by china evergrande group a fortune global 500 company.
 can you tell us a bit about a project youre working on now?
 on july 1 2020 we presented our new service pons mobility ecosystem. the selfdriving vehicle sango is at the centre of this system. it is the first generation of autonomous electric vehicles. it enables sustainable safe and chic shared mobility. the system offers a connected and responsive user interface. this lets riders adapt the interior design and environment to their needs.
 think of it like a luxury automated rideshare taxi service that can transport up to 6 passengers. you can reserve a seat through an app and select your privacy setting whether its an open rideshare or a car you share specifically with your family friends or workmates.  there are a variety of modes to select from. these modes adjust the seats and interior of the car for private mode social mode or family mode.
 we are working on a party mode where you can connect your spotify to sango and choose your own music lights etc. the vehicle has a strong focus on the user. of course there are different settings for if you want to work or relax. climate control is individual each seat has its own climate control system.
 we are even developing thematic modes. for example lets say you want a clean automated rideshare to get to work every day. you can gather people with the same type of interests with something like a game of thrones car. you can gather people who work at the same company or people who have the same hobby. it is highly customisable.
 the idea is that the pons service is so good and affordable that you really wont want to own your own car. this system uses cleaner energy and reduces the total number of cars on the road. it is adaptive shared electric mobility. we want to sell kilometres not cars.
 when will this be available?
 pons featuring sango is scheduled to go live in stockholm in late 2021 or early 2022 within a geofenced area. the pilot programme has been greenlit by the transportation authority. we plan to expand to other cities and countries following this launch.
 what unique engineering challenges or developments are featured?
 we are testing this car right now in trollhättan. we are using a new type of energy system for safety. if there is any kind of failure the vehicle has to continue the ride in a safe way. this requires lots of smart solutions.
 the architecture is also not like a regular car. of course the interior is highly adaptable. also the sango features inwheel electric motors. this allows for a lot of extra space in the vehicle and also makes the vehicle safer. you dont have big components in the middle. there is lots of space for adaptability and to put safety features in between in the very unlikely case of collision.
 there are so many new developments. it requires work in areas from ergonomics to routing to usability of appsi am constantly submitting things to the patent office including lots of new patents for automation robotics batteries etc.
 can students at university west hope to be involved?
 absolutely yes i believe a lot in the value of international students coming to learn with us before they graduate. we are happy to have students work on a joint masters thesis with nevs and university west. it is an exciting opportunity as everything is stemming from a new concept. for the past 100 years the auto industry has just been improving what was already there. now with electric cars were developing many completely new solutions.
 in this beginning of our new era we are so happy university west is starting this new master in electric vehicle engineering as well as incorporating knowledge of electric vehicles into their new bachelor in international mechanical engineering. i dont know if there is any other university with this type of focus.
 it is also a good opportunity for our company because many times university west students come with fresh ideas and a good mindset. after their work with us is complete we always try to keep the best students with the sharpest minds.
 more about the pons mobility ecosystem featuring sango on nevs website
 all employees including doctoral students  do you want to participate in an interview?
 how will the study be conducted?
 to participate it is not necessary that you yourself have experienced exposure but everyone is welcome to participate in the interview. for us it is important to be able to collect as many different experiences perceptions and understandings of inclusion andor exclusion as possible.
 what does it mean to participate in the interview?
 the interviews are conducted as a conversation based on an interview guide and deal not only with personal experiences but also your perception of how the issues is understood and handled at university west.
 the interviews are conducted as a conversation based on an interview guide and deal not only with personal experiences but also your perception of how the issues of inclusion and exclusion are handled at university west.
 the purpose of the interviews is not to identify individuals or events but to see overall patterns and understand processes.
 interested in contributing?
 you email intervjuerinkl@hv.se if you are interested in being interviewed.
 introduction videos
 we recommend all new international students to you check the following introduction videos before the start of the semester.
 the west card  your personal entrance card  library card etc
 information about student account
 eduroam wifi at campus
 information about it services
 information about library and student services study counselling study with disabililties and student health service
 the student union shows you around campus
 how to act in case of fire and other danger
 introduction to artificial intelligence and machine learning parttime campus iai600
 this course introduces the most common concepts ml and ai. the course also deals with proper applicability of different algorithms to diverse types of data. practical exercises are provided to give handson experience. importance of the quality of the data is emphasized as one of the keys to successful data analysis.
 bachelor of science in computer science software engineering information technology computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering industrial engineering and management or equivalent. the degree must include a course in programming and 15 he credits of mathematics. verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english 6 in the swedish upper secondary school high school or equivalent.
 introduction to electric vehicle systems and components parttime campus isk100
 15 he credits in mathematics. 30 he credits in mechanical engineering. verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english 6 in the swedish upper secondary school or equivalent.
 introduction to political thought fulltime campus ipi100
 introduction to political thought introduces students to some key debates and thinkers on politics in human history. the course is historically and thematically structured and concentrates on central concepts within political philosophy such as power justice freedom equality democracy state government and citizenship. how have these concepts been understood from ancient greece to the present? what relevance do they have for contemporary politics?
 introduction to programming with python parttime campus gpp110
 the course is an introduction to structured programming with python python 3. students learn to construct basic computer programs in python and to implement algorithms from pseudocode.
 fundamental programming concepts covered include control structures datatypes variables functions error signals and debugging.
 the course introduces basic skills required to design and build simple machine learning solutions using python as the programming language and the relevant python libraries. in particular the course focuses on both supervised and unsupervised machine learning including such algorithms as linear regression support vector machines decision trees ensemble learning kmeans and dbscan. during the course the students will learn to select the right ml algorithm for the task and optimize its parameters in order to achieve desired performance.
 introduktion till tillämpad maskininlärning introduction to applied machine learning
 introduktion till tillämpad maskininlärning introduction to applied machine learning 25 hp
 three years of higher education bachelor level in engineering  technology bachelor degree corresponding to 180cp. passed courses of 25 he credits within the field of machine learning and ai. passed courses of 75 he credits within the field of python programming. alternatively relevant professional work experience.
 itm600
 repetitionsuppgifter.pdf
 logga in genom att klicka på access through your institution
 lunchseminarium med två av våra statsvetare the invasion that changed everything 24 feb 2023
 we decided that mariia and i would go to the west
 a nuclear power attacking a democratic state
 till suhfs webbplats
 investment analysis and portfolio management fulltime campus iap200
 this course provides a deep understanding of the portfolio management process including various dimensions clientadvisor relationship identification of needs investment objectives and constraints analysis of various asset classes and instruments selection and construction of investment portfolios with optimal riskreturn characteristics.
 economics basic level 225 he credits.
 invoices to university west
 information about einvoicing to university west
 from 1 april 2019 all purchases in the public sector must be invoiced by electronic invoice einvoice. for the purposes of act 20181277 electronic invoices means invoices that are issued sent and received in a structured electronic format allows them to be processed automatically and electronically. a pdf invoice does not count as an einvoice.
 more information about mandatory invoices to the public sector can be found on the agency for digital governments diggs website mandatory einvoicing to the public sector.
 the law can be read here act 20181277 on electronic invoices as a result of public procurement.
 the invoice must be issued to university west
 the order reference must always be on invoices to university west and must be stated by the buyer when ordering. there is a field in the invoice systems that is intended for the customers reference and it is crucial that the reference is entered there. university wests client references usually consist of 28 characters and can contain both letters and numbers.
 university west uses visma proceedos ecommerce service with the system supplier visma commerce. the information below is aimed at suppliers who wish to join the service in order to send einvoices to university west. there are several ways in which we can receive einvoices from yourself
 electronic invoices can be sent via the peppol network.address in peppol 00072021004052
 university west can receive einvoices in the following formats peppol invoice 5 a over 2 peppol creditnote 5a ver 2 peppol billing 3.0 svefaktura 1.0
 this solution is free of charge and is mainly suitable for smaller suppliers who send few invoices. in visma proceedos invoice portal you manually register the invoices which are then sent as einvoices.
 if you want to start using the invoice portal to send einvoices to us email ekonomi@hv.se and specify which email address you want to use to log in to the system. you will then receive a link with an invitation to register in the supplier center.
 if you are already connected to the supplier center via another customer you can also send invoices to university west.
 for support and guides
 3. svefaktura with transport profile basic ebms link
 our taskseinvoice format sfti svefakturaour party identity recipient id 2021004052 our company registration numbergln number 7300009037742transport method protocol  sfti transport profile bastechnical reception address note no link address
 more information about einvoice formatting and shipping method can be found on the sfti website.
 if you use one of the following operators to send einvoices you can let them forward invoices to us as well inexchange pagero creditflow tieto evry bankgirocentralen bgc basware
 melt pool electromagnetic force model extended to account for free surface deformation  application to gas metal arc
 pradip aryal isabelle choquet
 modelling of thermal ﬂuid dynamics for fusion welding
 chinnapat panwisawas yogesh sovani richard p. turner jeﬀery w. brooks hector c. basoalto isabelle choquet
 main issues for a fully predictive plasma spray torch model and numerical considerations
 a multiscale multiphysics approach to modelling of additive manufacturing in nickelbased superalloys
 c. panwisawas y. sovani m.j. anderson r. turner n. m. palumbo b. c. saunders isabelle choquet j.w. brooks h.c. basoalto
 effect of cathode model on arc attachment for short highintensity arc on a refractory cathode
 a review of cathodearc coupling modeling in gtaw
 laser welding process  a  review of keyhole welding modelling
 analysis of the influence of the composition of the shielding gas on pressure force and heat fluxes in arc welding
 magnetic field models for high intensity arcs applied to welding  a comparison between three different formulations
 review of arc efficiency values for gas tungsten arc welding
 on the choice of electromagnetic model for shorthighintensity arcs applied to welding
 electric welding arc modeling with the threedimensional solver openfoam  a comparison of different electromagnetic models
 non equilibrium ionization in magnetized twotemperature thermal plasma
 deposition rate increase in aps processes by means of multiple injection ports
 new powder port holder geometry to avoid lump formation in aps
 numerical and experimental study of niparticle impact on a tisurface
 clogging and lump formation during atmospheric plasma spraying with powder injection downstream the plasma gun
 process modeling of powder bed and directed energy deposition
 gas tungsten arc models including the physics of the cathode layer  remaining issues
 a novel arc heat treatment technique for producing graded microstructures through controlled temperature gradients
 a predictive model for gas tungsten arc heat source
 coupling boundary condition for highintensity electric arc attached on a nonhomogeneous refractory cathode
 fundamental mode of freely decaying laminar swirling flows
 modelling of electrodearc coupling in electric arc welding
 design of a device to induce swirling flow in pipes  a rational approach
 improvement of a pseudo kinetic method for the calculation of a twotemperature thermal plasma composition
 numerical modelling of shielding gas flow and heat transfer in laser welding process
 modeling and simulation of a heat source in electric arc welding
 implementation of a 3d solver for electric arc welding coupling fluid mechanics with electromagentics
 numerical simulation of arxco2 shielding gas and its effect on an electric welding arc
 nozzle exit geometry and lump formation in atmospheric plasma spraying
 hydrodynamic limit for an arc discharge at atmospheric pressure
 a strong ionization model in plasma physics
 a hierarchy of diffusion models for partially ionized plasmas
 welcome to next years nordic iscar
 what is isep?
 isep stands for international student exchange programs and it is a network with over 300 member universities in 42 countries. about 140 of these universities are located in the united states. university west has been a member since 2008. the purpose of this network is to give students the opportunity to study abroad regardless of the system for tuition fees that exits in different countries.
 what can you do as a student at university west?
 as a uw student you can apply to go abroad as an exchange student isep exchange within the network for one or two semesters regardless of which program you study at the university. it provides a unique opportunity to study at a university with which university west does not have an exchange agreement.
 as a nominated isep student you can then choose from all the universities in the network and you will received detailed information about the application process and the selection criteria that isep and we at the university use.
 it is also important to know that most part of the universities require that the incoming exchange student must have passed an english test toefl or ielts.
 apply for a place in the isep programme locally here at university west.  the link to the application for isep you can find in the section important dates hv.segoabroad
 if you are granted a place you must also apply in the isep portal. only students nominated by uw can proceed with the application here. you can read more about how it works and which documents you need to attach on iseps website.
 the main principle with isep is that it should be the same cost for the exchange no matter where you come from. this means for example a student from the usa who pays tuition fees at his home university and a swedish student must pay the same amount to exchange places with each other for one semester.
 the application fee to isep is 100 that you pay when you apply
 there is also a mandatory isep student insurance. necessary to have in order for the isep system to support your visa application it costs approximately 100 per month
 isep placement fee an administrative fee of 425.
 program fee which is calculated based on a students costs for food and accommodation during one semester and is 34 000 sek. this is the amount you have to pay to university west
 check information on the website isep study abroad you can also specify your option as a university west student and get an overview of what options are available for you
 register for a language test toefl or ielts.
 check with csn which opportunities you have for help with financing if applicable to you
 vpn and hvguest is up and running again.
 vpn and hvguest wireless is working again.
 service and itdepartment
 overall responsibility for the universitys it use.
 the departments overall mission
 staff itdepartment
 systems technician                        systemspecialist
 systems technician
 teamleader servicecenter
 support technician                        supporttekniker
 lecturer systems technician
 facility and security officer
 it engineer                        senior avspecialist
 facility and security coordinator
 it introduction
 with this it introduction we hope that you as a new student will get help with getting started with the university west it services.
 computer account
 to be able to log on to the universitys computers and to use our it services you need to have an university west account.
 for more information on how to create your account go to the page before start of studies.
 if you have an account already you should continue to use that account. if it is closed you can use a self service to open it. to open an existing account reset your password or read more go to the page my account.
 on the students webpages student you will find announcements general information and links to our systems as well as login to office 365. under it services and support you will find information from the service  it department for example practical guides faqs and information about software that you may install on your private computer etc.
 office 365 is a web based solution for email and document management as well as teams and sharepoint for collaboration in groups. it is important that you use your student email because you get a lot of the information from university west to this address.read more and log in to office 365.
 you will find your student email in office 365. it is important that you use your student email as it is through this university west sends much of the information to you.read more and log in to office 365  email.
 canvas  our learning platform
 canvas is the name of university wests learning platform. canvas is used as a pedagogical tool to execute courses. in canvas you will always find information about your course schedule and literature list. depending on how your teacher chooses to use canvas you may also find quizzes hand in assignments discussion forums and much more. please note you will be given access to your course in canvas automatically when you register for a courseto the canvas page
 home directory h
 the home directory is a safe place to store your files. when you log on to any computer on campus you can access your home directory. your home directory can be found under this pc in the file explorer. it is the drive with your username and h. we recommend that you save your work here because backups are done regularly. do not ever save anything on drive c the size of your home directory is 10 gb.
 the files saved in the home directory can also be accessed from any internet connected computer through the webservice files.hv.se.what is homedirectory and the system my files?
 you can connect to wifi at campus and many other places remember that even if you are a distance student you can use wifi eduroam where it is available you just need to have it installed go to the pages about wifi
 security awareness
 it is important to know your responsibility as a user at university west. here you can read about that are you aware of security? here you will find the user agreement etc.
 if you have any questions you can turn to servicecenter. to consider when reporting a problem.
 for students at campus
 at university west we have about 300 computers for students. we have about 200 different applications. the service  it department only gives support on standard software. the standard softwares are installed at all of our computers. where are the computers?
 please note no food or drink beside the computers
 west card
 to be able to print you need a west card. your west card is also a key card and a library card. the pin code that you choose when you create your account belongs to your west card. how do i get a west card?
 i want to print
 you can print scan and copy at the universitys multifunction printers. the universitys printing and copying system only have cashless payments. how does it work?
 you will find more information for you who are a new student here
 it and management is a stimulating and futurefocused oneyear masters programme. fully taught in english its designed for students with a background in social andor computer sciences who are keenly interested in analysing developing implementing and evaluating ict interventions for organisations. weve developed your programme in close cooperation with local industries and municipalities focusing on current it issues that concern your potential employers. after two foundational courses youll choose one of the following specialisations
 1advanced software development full stack developer
 acquire specialised knowledge on all levels of software development such as servers and hosting environments relational and nonrelational databases using external apis user experience etc.
 2virtual and augmented reality vrar  immersive computing
 learn tools and practices for creating virtual environments and immersive applications while also gaining knowledge of relevant design principles and application domains.
 3it strategy and architecture  it management
 dive deeply into the process required for digitisation and digital transformation of a company or organisation gaining an understanding of the tools and insights needed to assist them in their transition to a digital world.
 work intergrated learning
 university west is swedens leading university when it comes to work integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continues to lead the field today. in this programme youll earn an academic degree while also gaining practical work experience. realworld projects at local companies and organisations will be an important part of your studies.
 the majority of your courses combine academic theory and work practice in some way. for example ideally youll finish your chosen specialisation course and your masters thesis project by completing real projects in cooperation with local industry partners. students assume responsibility in working with programme staff to help secure these collaborations.
 international experience
 fully taught in english this programme allows you to study with both swedish and international students in a modern multicultural environment. youll be taught by eminent academic scholars from sweden the united states and syria. in addition to your advanced education in it this programme prepares you for a challenging and stimulating career in an increasingly globalised world.
 after completing the programme youll be qualified for an international career in one of a variety of different fields such as virtual and augmented media advanced software development and itarchitecture. through the various forms of work integrated learning built into your programme you will have the opportunity to gain contacts and experiences in your field making you highly
 the master in it and management qualifies you to apply for further studies at the postgraduate or phd level within the subject of informatics or related fields.
 in this country we focus more on practical learning
 before coming to sweden tahere roshanzade had experience from working within the field of it as an expert on computer networks. now to develop her skills further she studies a master in it and management here at university west.
 i want to enhance my skills and fit into the global job market
 the university applies much work integrated learning
 to log in
 in many of our systems you log in with just a username and password.
 in some of our systems for example our microsoft services we also use multifactor authentication mfa when logging in. you therefore need to activate mfa. read about mfa and how to activate it here
 to log in to office 365 email etc enter your username followed by @student.hv.se. this may look like this buba0001@student.hv.se. in other systems you log in with your username without @student.hv.se e. g. buba0001. multifactor authentication mfa is also used in office365.
 your password is the same in all our systems.
 contact us with any kind of question
 reporting a problem
 our learning platform
 self service
 refill my printing account paper copies
 print from your private computer
 all you need to know to get started with your studies at university west
 rules and regulations
 access your home directory from home
 operational information and service windows
 we have a service window every wednesday 1630  2300 local time
 office 365 epost mm
 it  introduktion
 tu dortmund vinod krishna selpol manufacturing engineering master 120 credits
 exchange studies in france
 eigsi la rochelle amanda hadenius surveing engineering 180 credits
 exchange studies in italy
 engineering vision st.gallen nima haghnegahdar industrial economy 180 credits
 summer school in china
 nuaa nanjing university aeronautics and astronautics nanjing ludvig gran mechanical engineering med coop 180 credits
 when nursing education becomes political  normcritical perspectives in a campusbased clinical learning environment
 margaretha herrman ivan andrés castillo
 elisabeth olsson ivan andrés castillo
 florence on the floor
 professional etherapy in a low budget setting
 use the appmeasure mental fatiguetake control
 mindfulnessbased stress reduction mbsr delivered live on the internet to individuals suffering from mental fatigue after an acquired brain injury
 staff member at department for studies of the individual and society central administration.
 my focus is on health promotion linked to working life. it is about how to work developmentoriented to contribute to a better working environment and for organizations leaders and employees to have a sustainable work environment. great focus lies on change work related to wil.
 lup  leadership development program for managers in fyrbodal municipalities for 5 years
 hammaröprojektet   an rd project in collaboration with colleagues at halmstad university for 2 years. the project was about change work linked to a management team.
 carena  rd project which was a collaborative project between several universities where christer sorbring and i were responsible for a part.
 health promotion working life work environment change work change management ail
 international students coming to study at university west are offered accommodation at järnvägsgatan 17 arranged by the housing company hammar nordic ab  in cooperation with university west.
 hammar nordic offers 24 apartments located in the centre of trollhättan very close to the train station and the campus.
 all these apartments are private accommodation where you live on your own except for one apartment where two students can live together sharing the bedroom. all apartments are furnished and the kitchen is equipped with cooking utensils. laundry facilities are located on the ground floor and the building is equipped with a lift.
 rent and contracts
 the rent for smaller studios 19.6 to 22.2 m2 is between sek 5400 and 5700 a month. the rent for mediumsized studios 24.5 to 27.2 m2 is between sek 5900 and 6600 a month. the rent for bigger studios 31 to 35.3 m2 is between sek 6700 to 6800 a month. the rent for the shared apartment 50.6 m2 is sek 9059.the contracts and rent are fixed for the full semester or academic year. internet heating electricity and water are included in the rent. the rent is paid on a monthly basis.
 some example impressions of apartmentsrooms at järnvägsgatan
 higher education as a pathway for female immigrants establishment and wellbeing in sweden
 professional learning in family support social work in sweden  practitioners integration of ebp and reflection
 social workers use of reflection and the influence of an evidencebased model
 the understanding and use of reflection in family support social work
 swedish parents satisfaction and experience of facilitators and barriers with family checkup  a mixed methods study
 promoting reflection in family support social work with an evidencebased model
 you can find me at my office at the production technology centre innovatum.
 robotic friction stir welding in lightweight battery assembly of extrusioncast aluminium alloys
 properties augmentation of cast hypereutectic alsi alloy through friction stir processing
 highspeed friction stir welding in light weight battery trays for the ev industry
 a friction stir welding case study using temperature controlled robotics with a hpdc cylinder block and dissimilar materials joining
 insitu temperature measurement in friction stir welding of thick section aluminium alloys
 robotic stationary shoulder fsw  benefits and limitations
 analysis of plunge and dwell parameters of robotic fsw using twt temperature feedback control
 cooling rate effect on temperature controlled fsw process
 feedback control of robotic friction stir welding
 temperature control of robotic friction stir welding using the thermoelectric effect
 threedimensional friction stir welding of iconel 718 using the esab rosio fswrobot
 surface quality and strength in robotic friction stir welding of thin automotive aluminium alloys
 robotic friction stir welding for automotive and aviation applications
 correction to  properties augmentation of cast hypereutectic alsi alloy through friction stir processing metals and materials international 2022 10.1007s12540022012077
 high speed friction stir welding of aa6063t6 alloy in lightweight battery trays for ev industry  influence of tool rotation speeds
 welding temperature during fsw of 5 mm thickness aa6082t6
 robotic friction stir welding of complex geometry and mixed materials
 temperature measurements during friction stir welding
 twt method for temperature measurement during fsw process
 deflection model for robotic friction stir welding
 thermoelectric method for temperature measurement in friction stir welding
 robotic friction stir welding for flexible production
 influence of sidetilt angle on process forces and lap joint strength in robotic friction stir welding
 liaison librarian department of health sciences
 user education
 jim andersén is a full professor at the school of business economics and it. he received his phd in industrial economics and organization from mälardalen university in 2005 and has held full professorships at umeå university and the university of skövde.
 he has published in several highly regarded peerreviewed journals including human resource management us technovation the international journal of human resource management international journal of management reviews international small business journal and organization and environment.
 for a full list of his publications please visit google scholar.
 45 years of successful innovation
 neurodiversity in manufacturing companies
 here you will find available positions at university west presented in date order.
 university west is one of the largest employers in the region. over 700 people work here and nearly 13000 people study. the campus is centrally located in trollhättan and has good commuting connections. welcome to us
 application deadline 04 oct 2024
 appointments procedure at university west
 guideline for the assessment of eligibility requirements for professor 2023801.pdf
 guidelines on the application of the appointments procedure
 instructions for preparing applications for advertised teaching positions and promotion applications  hv 2024193.pdf
 jobs and the future
 for us it is just as important to prepare you for working life as it is to get a good education. during your time at the university we will therefore help you in various ways so that you are well prepared in the eyes of employers.
 as a student can you get support in your future planning? what are your thoughts on the future?
 what dreams do you have?     what does that mean?   what do i get?
 professor of material science and director production technology
 additive manufacturing of ph 138 mo family  a review
 directed energy deposition of metal alloys
 study of pulsed laser beam welding of nickelbased superalloy g27
 achmad ariaseta dario pick joel andersson olanrewaju ojo
 corrosion resistance and microstructure analysis of additively manufactured 22 chromium duplex stainless steel by laser metal deposition with wire
 towards laser metal deposition of modified ph 138mo powder
 metal additive manufacturing  motivation process portfolio and application potential
 metadynamic recrystallization in the nibased superalloy haynes 282
 ductilization and grain refinement of aa7075t651 alloy via stationary shoulder friction stir processing
 influence of laser metal deposition process parameters on a precipitation hardening stainless steel
 welding of special alloys
 current status on manufacturing routes to produce metal matrix composites  stateoftheart
 fabrication and weldability aspects of ni and nife based superalloys  a review
 characterization of laser powder bed fusion of nickelbased superalloy haynes 282
 kameshwaran swaminathan jonas olsson tahira raza peter harlin joel andersson
 influence of keyhole tig welding parameters on weld geometry of newlydeveloped superalloy vdm alloy 780
 scanning electron microscopy and atom probe tomography characterization of laser powder bed fusion precipitation strengthening nickelbased superalloy
 the role of the strengthening phases on the haz liquation cracking in a cast nibased superalloy used in industrial gas turbines
 keyhole tig welding of newly developed nickelbased superalloy vdm alloy 780
 enhancing grain refinement and corrosion behavior in az31b magnesium alloy via stationary shoulder friction stir processing
 influence of laser powder bed fusion process parameters on the microstructure and cracking susceptibility of nickelbased superalloy alloy 247lc
 effect of process parameters and heat treatments on deltaphase precipitation in directed energy deposited alloy 718
 dual sided composite formation in al 6061b4c using novel bobbin tool friction stir processing
 a novel approach to measure threedimensional surface topography for stationary shoulder friction stir processing
 influence of laser powder bed fusion process parameters on the microstructure of solution heattreated nickelbased superalloy alloy 247lc
 experimental investigation on welding of 2.25 cr1.0 mo steel with regulated metal deposition and gmaw technique incorporating metalcored wires
 effect of laser power on the deposition of alloy 718 powder on alumina substrate using laser directed energy deposition  a singletrack study
 dilipkumar choudary ratnala fabian hanning joel andersson shrikant v. joshi
 sustainable production through advanced manufacturing intelligent automation and work integrated learning  proceedings of the 11th swedish production symposium sps2024
 development of functionally graded metalceramic systems by directed energy deposition  a review
 proceedings of the 10th international symposium on superalloy 718 and derivatives
 additive manufacturing of highperformance metallic materials
 microstructure gradient formation in electronbeam melting powderbed fusion of a gammaprime nibased superalloy
 microstructural study of keyhole tig welded nickelbased superalloy g27
 keyhole tig welding of new colean nickelbased superalloy g27
 dynamic recrystallization during hot compression of nibased superalloy haynes 282
 effect of shortterm isothermal exposure on the ductility signature of waspaloy in the temperature range of 750950 c a comparison with haynes 282
 varestraint weldability testing of sanicro 25 and 310s stainless steel
 the effects of chemistry variations on hot cracking susceptibility of haynes 282 for aerospace applications
 solidification structures and phases in wire arc additive manufactured c250 maraging steel
 additive manufacturing of 18 nickel maraging steels  defect structure and mechanical properties a review
 elucidating the effect of step cooling heat treatment on the properties of 2.25 cr1.0 mo steel welded with a combination of gmaw techniques incorporating metalcored wires.
 subhash das jay vora vivek patel joel andersson danil yurievich pimenov khaled giasin
 developing superplasticity in magnesium alloys with the help of friction stir processing and its variants  a review
 augmentation of weld penetration by flux assisted tig welding and its distinct variants for oxygen free copper
 columnartoequiaxed grain transition in powder bed fusion via mimicking casting solidification and promoting in situ recrystallization
 influence of homogenisation treatments on the hot ductility of cast ati 718plus  effect of niobium and minor elements on liquation characteristics
 moléscases teresa  joel olofsson 2024. thinkingfortranslating mannerofmotion in a parallel corpus of henning mankells crime novels. onomázein revista de lingüística filología y traducción 63.
 olofsson joel 2022. coevent relations in swedish motion constructions. i laura sarde  benjamin fagard red. neglected aspects of motion event descriptions. john benjamins.
 coussé evie peter andersson  joel olofsson red. 2018. grammaticalization meets construction grammar. amsterdamphiladelphia john benjamins.
 loenheim lisa benjamin lyngfelt joel olofsson julia prentice  sofia tingsell 2016. constructicography meets second language education. on constructions in teaching aids and the usefulness of a swedish constructicon. i s. de knop  g. gilquin red. applied construction grammar 327355. berlin de gruyter mouton.
 olofsson joel 2014. argument structure constructions and syntactic productivity  the case of swedish motion constructions. constructions 172014.
 professor in business administration specialising in public organisation.
 backsourcing
 overloading
 organisation of palliative consultation in hospitals
 teamwork
 purchasers control
 further information about my publications is available in the following databases
 i have extensive experience of teachingsupervision at all levels. at undergraduate level i am course director and examiner for courses dealing with organisation and leadership. at postgraduate level i supervise and examine masters dissertations. within phd studies i have acted as main supervisor assistant supervisor opponent and member of examining committees for doctoral theses.
 university management council
 member of the ethical review authority
 public administration and management
 international journal of public administration issn 15324265
 team performance management issn 13527592
 journal of contingencies and crisis management issn 14685973
 international journal of emergency services issn 20470894
 international journal of disaster risk science issn 20950055
 journal of health planning and management issn 10991751
 journal of health organization and management issn 14777266
 journal of evaluation in clinical practice issn 13652753
 leadership in health services issn 17511879
 reviewer international journals
 i have been engaged as a reviewer by some 50 international journals on more than 100 different occasions. the reviews of articles have primarily been within three areas 1 public organisation and management 2 health management and 3 crisis and disaster management.
 outsourcing and backsourcing in a time of crisis  experiences of double opportunism
 disaster collaborative exercises for healthcare teamwork in a saudi context
 quasibacksourcing in the public sector  the challenge of withdrawing from an intertwined and longstanding relationship
 impact of virtual disaster collaboration exercises on disaster leadership at hospitals in saudi arabia
 drivers of outsourcing and backsourcing in the public sector  from idealism to pragmatism
 first initiatives in prehospital care  basing assessments on incomplete preliminary information
 interorganisational exercises in dry and wet context  why do maritime response organisations gain more knowledge from exercises at sea than those on shore?
 coping with citizens and stress  interaction strategies during public service delivery within health care the police and social work
 learning and usefulness of collaboration exercises  a study of the three level collaboration 3lc exercises between the police ambulance and rescue services
 how doctors practice teamleadership
 collaboration exercices what do they contribute?  a study of learning and usefulness
 common incentives for teamwork  the unspoken contracts significance
 guest editors  special issue management control organisation and leadership in the healthcare sector
 models of teamwork ideal or not?  a critical study of theoretical team models
 from artefact to effect  the organising effects of artefacts on teams
 backsourcing in the private and public sectors  a systematic review
 editorial  emergency crisis and risk management current perspectives on the development of joint risk mitigation preparedness and response efforts
 involuntary backsourcing in the public sector  from conflict to collaboration
 how do streetlevel bureaucrats manage high workloads?  collegial mechanisms at the organisational level  experiences from public healthcare organisations
 outcomes of establishing an urgent care centre in the same location as an emergency department
 annelie raidla katrin darro tobias carlson amir khorrammanesh johan berlin eric carlström
 collaboration exercises in emergency work  outcomes in terms of learning and usefulness
 emergency management and preparedness training for youth empty  the results of the first swedish pilot study
 doctors functional leadership inpsychiatric healthcare teams  a reversible leadership logic
 collaboration exercises  the lack of collaborative benefits
 managing boundaries at the accident scene  a qualitative study of collaboration exercises
 cultural camouflage  a critical study of how artefacts are camouflaged and mental health policy subverted
 book review  alvesson mats. sveningsson stefan 2008. changing organizational culture cultural change work in progress. london routledge
 on the solidification of al alloys during microgravity
 publikationer google scholar
 gross johan  boyd sally. 2022. sweden suburban swedish. kapitel i urban contact dialects and language change insights from global north and south. red paul kerswill  heike wiese. routledge studies in language change series. london routledge
 forsberg julia ribbås maria therese  gross johan. 2020. selfassessment and standard language ideologies bilingual adolescents in sweden reflect on their language proficiencies. journal of multilingual and multicultural development 115.
 gross johan  forsberg julia. 2019. weak lips? a possible merger of iandy in gothenburg. phonetica 121.
 gross johan. 2018. mapping vowels variation and change in the speech of gothenburg adolescents. avhandling göteborgs universitet. göteborg.
 gross johan. 2018. segregated vowels language variation and dialect features among gothenburg youth. language variation and change 303 315.
 gross johan boyd sally leinonen therese  walker james. 2016 . a tale of two cities and one vowel sociolinguistic variation in swedish. language variation and change 282 225247.
 staff member at service  it division of computer engineering and computer science.
 what i do
 i work at the library with aqcuisitions interlibrary loans and cataloguing. i work in the library information desk and the digital dropin a couple of times a week.
 the library team systems and metadata
 the library team library room
 jonas holmberg about sicomap
 edvard svenman about sicomap
 a multidomain instrument for safety climate  military safety climate questionnaire mscq and nosacq50
 the student learning context during a pandemic
 safety climate in military organizations  a pilot study of an adjusted multidomain instrument
 the influence of the environment on directed attention blood pressure and heart rate  an experimental study using a relaxation intervention
 how do participants in naturebased therapy experience and evaluate their rehabilitation?
 enhanced feminine sexual behavior and infertility in female rats prenatally treated with an antiestrogen
 the swedish pandemic landscape on twitter  an exploratory study using statistical methods
 aerodrom security climate  development and validation of the aerodrome security climate questionnaire adsecq
 propper planning and preparation prevents piss poor performance 7p training for the fictive scenario or learning to deal with reality?
 naturebased stress management course for individuals at risk of adverse health effects from workrelated stresseffects on stress related symptoms workability and sick leave
 from rat sexual behavior to schizophrenia  a tribute to professor emeritus knut larsson
 wil conference 2022
 publication in a special issue
 we can now confirm possibilities of publication in a special issue of studies in continuing education
 after the conference we will arrange for the special issue and the process for that will be announced during the conference. note that the consideration of a paper for the special issue is separate from acceptance of a paper for the conference itself that a special process and date will be set for the submission of papers to the special issue and that papers will be considered through the normal journal reviewing process.
 studies in continuing education proposal for special issue on learning in and for a changing worklife
 theme the conditions for learning and competence development in most professional fields and sectors of work life are rapidly changing due to factors such as digitalization globalization and robotization. similar challenges are raised by the global need for a transition towards sustainable work practices. for institutions of higher education this calls for development and innovation of pedagogical methods that are adapted and aligned with the conditions for the contemporary professional workplace.
 in this special issue we aim at illuminating tensions and relations between the conditions for learning in work lifelong learning and the pedagogical models aiming at learning for work workintegrated learning. hence we welcome contributions dealing with models for lifelong learning and curriculum development in workintegrated learning as well as empirical and theoretical work highlighting the nature of a changing work life.
 guest editor in chief  prof. ulrika lundh snis university west
 guest coeditors prof. lars svensson university west prof. roger säljö gothenburg university associate professor karin högberg university west
 aleksandr tiulkanov 2023 is it safe to use chatgpt for your task?
 kailu  quality framework for workintegrated learning in higher education
 kajsas methodological interest lies in the quantitative analytical methods such as structural equation modeling multilevel analysis growth curve modeling and mixture modeling.
 peer reviewed journal articles
 yang hansen k.  streitholt r. 2018. does schooling actually perpetuate educational inequality in mathematics performance? a question of validity. zdm international journal of mathematics education.
 fjellman a. m. yang hansen k.  beach d. 2018. school choice and implications for equity the new political geography of the swedish upper secondary school market. educational review.
 nasiopoulou p. williams p. sheridan s.  yang hansen k. 2017. exploring preschool teachers professional profiles in swedish preschool a latent class analysis. early child development and care.
 yang hansen k.  gustafsson j.e. 2016. determinants of country differences in effects of parental education on childrens academic achievement. submitted to large scale assessments in education. 41 11. doi 10.1186s4053601600271.
 gustafsson j.e. nielsen t.  yang hansen k. 2016. school characteristics moderating the relation between student socioeconomic status and mathematics achievement in grade 8. evidence from 50 countries in timss 2011. studies in educational evaluation.
 yang hansen k.  munck i. 2012. exploring the measurement profiles of socioeconomic background indicators and their differences in reading achievement a twolevel latent class analysis. the ieri monograph series 5 6795. award paper in 2014 iea wolf award.
 davidov e. yang hansen k. gustafsson j. e. schmidt p.  bamberg s. 2006. does money matter? a theorydriven growth mixture model to explain travelmode choice with experimental data. methodology 23 124134. doi 10.102716142241.2.3.124.
 yang y. 2003b. measuring socioeconomic status and its effects at individual and collective levels a crosscountry comparison. acta universitatis gothoburgensis gothenburg studies in educational sciences 193 gothenburg.
 edited book and book chapters
 rosén m. yang hansen k.  wolff u. 2016 eds. cognitive abilities and educational outcomes a festschrift in honor of janeric gustafsson. springer international publishing. doi 10.10079783319434735
 yang hansen k. gustafsson j.e.  rosén m. 2014. school performance differences and policy variations in finland norway and sweden. in a. b. kavli  t. hallvard. eds. northern lights on timss and pirls 2011 differences and similarities in the nordic countries pp. 2548. nordon nordic council of ministers.
 gustafsson j.e. yang hansen k.  rosén m. 2013.effects of home background on student achievement in reading mathematics and science at the fourth grade. in m. o. martin and i. v. s. mullis eds timss and pirls 2011 relationships among reading mathematics and science achievement at the fourth grade implications for early learning. boston college usa.
 yang hansen k. 2004. a crosscountry comparison on the effects of socioeconomic status at individual and collective levels. in l. m. herrera  g. francia eds. educational policies implications for equity equality and equivalence. 175201. örebro university.
 nilsen t. blömeke s. yang hansen k.  gustafsson j. e. 2016. are school characteristics related to equity? the answer may depend on a countrys developmental level. policy brief no. 10. international association for the evaluation of educational achievement.
 integrating educational quality and educational equality into a model of mathematics performance
 victoria rolfe kajsa yang hansen rolf strietholt
 the impact of education policies on socioeconomic inequality in student achievement  a review of comparative studies
 rolf strietholt janeric gustafsson nina hogrebe victoria rolfe monica rosén isa steinmann kajsa yang hansen
 changes in the structure and variances in grades at individual and school levels over time.
 christina cliffordson janeric gustafsson kajsa yang hansen
 contribution to the validation of the expectancyvalue scale for primary school students
 does inequality in opportunity perpetuate inequality in outcomes?  international evidence from four timss cycles
 victoria rolfe rolf strietholt kajsa yang hansen
 student assessment in the landscape of international largescale studies
 identifying the key source of deteriorating educational equity in sweden between 1998 and 2014
 changes in the variances of school marks and ses and ethnic background effect between schools and individuals  a multilevel multigroup analysis.
 stars talks  promoting healthy aging in albania
 stars eu has launched a program of online seminars in which specialists from the various areas that are part of the alliance will present innovative projects and proposals based on science and knowledge with the potential to support regional development. promoting healt...
 stars eu has launched a program of online seminars in which specialists from the various areas that are part of the alliance will present innovative projects and proposals based on science and knowledge with the potential to support regional development. entreprenuerial...
 metal additive manufacturing with focus on laser based process and ni based superalloys.
 m.s materials science purdue university usa
 b.tech metallurgical and materials engineering nit trichy india
 work experience
 manufacturing and rd roles in automotive  oil  gas sectors for a decade.
 angelo t. a. 2017. assessing motivation to improve learning practical applications of kellers mvp model and arcsv design process. new directions for teaching and learning 2017152 99108
 kandidatprogram i human resources heltid campus sgphr
 i work with targeted study support for students and doctoral students with disabilities at the department of social and behavioural studies. employees at university west can also contact me regarding questions about targeted study support. i am also a contact person for questions concerning talking books.
 the cooperation team for the department of social and behavioural studies
 secularized and multireligious classroom practicediscourses and interactions
 everyone can play football no matter where they come from  discourses in open sport activities for newly arrived children and teenagers
 discourses of religion and secularism in religious education classrooms
 discourses of religion in the classroom practice  religious education in upper secondary school at vocational and academic preparatory programs.
 religious education in contemporary pluralistic sweden
 who is we in the classroom of religious education?
 swedish religious education at the end of the 1960s  classroom observations early video ethnography and the national curriculum of 1962
 existential questions in religious education  opening up discussions in upper secondary school
 lived religion and religious education
 nonconfessional  neutral?  discourses of religion in contemporary pluralistic swedish reclassrooms
 religious education in the multicultural society
 from christian religious education to religious education in sweden  classroom observations early video ethnography and the national curriculum of 1962
 representation of religions  religious education in classroom practice
 my phd thesis 2011 was written in the field of democratic theory and compared two contemporary thinkers chantal mouffe and jürgen habermas. i contrasted their writings about politics and political subjectivity in an ambition to carve out a third position on radical democracy that moved beyond both mouffe and habermas.
 in the second project together with adrienne sörbom and andrea krizsán funded by the foundation for baltic and east european studies 20202023 we focused on policy advice in illiberal contexts exploring what role think tanks a special type of civil society actor play in such countries.
 during 2022 i was working with ann towns and elin bjarnegård on a report commissioned by the expert group for aid studies. we evaluated the methods of implementation of the swedish feminist foreign policy in partner countries. the report is available here
 i teach and supervise at the ippe program.
 civil society think tanks policy advice dedemocratization illiberalism diplomacy and gender feminist foreign policy
 open access  emergency medical response in mass casualty tunnel incidentswith emphasis on prehospital care  holgersson librelloph.com
 sustainability  free fulltext  expansive learning process of exercise organizers the case of major fire incident exercises in underground mines mdpi.com
 situational awareness during a fullscale exercise in an underground mine a qualitative singlecase study of the ambulance incident commander  sciencedirect
 2017 trainee dalsland
 a surrogate model based global optimization method
 modelling and simulation of moving boundaries and convective heat transfer in nonautogenous fusion weld pools using femlab 3.1
 stereo vision for path correction in offline programmed robot welding
 february 26 2024paper reviews due
 march 1 2024registration opens
 march 15 2024notification of doctoral consortium acceptances
 march 22 2024notification of paper acceptances
 march 31 2024camera ready submissions
 march 31 2024deadline for prototype panel tutorials and workshop submissions
 april 17 2024notification of prototype panel tutorials and workshop acceptances
 may 17 2024registration closes
 keynote speakers cracking phenomena  conference 2025
 chris haywood is a senior lecturer school of arts and cultures at newcastle university. chris main interests is on the men and masculinities. he is currently working on exploring how men negotiate different dating practices in the areas of speed dating online dating and mobile romance. he is also involved in the cultural analysis of schooling and education. a key part of this work involves exploring the interplay between the institutionallyled discursive formation of identity categories and how those discourses are lived out. one areas of current concern is to think about how schools gender their pupils through age racial and sexual categories.
 power point presentations
 presentation of keynotes for the vilärconference.
 dr. norah mcrae university of waterloo
 title
 a purposedriven ecosystem approach to wil and career education
 as an institution of higher learning our mission is to prepare our students for their future of work within an increasingly volatile uncertain complex and ambiguous vuca world.  while this concept might have been viewed as something that would occur in the distant future the covid pandemic has brought home the realities of navigating volatility uncertainty complexity and ambiguity in 2021 making clear that adapting to this uncertain state will be required of our students and graduates as they enter the workplace.
 this keynote will describe the strengths of an intentional integrated workintegrated learning wil and career education ecosystem to prepare students for the future of work. it will draw upon activity theory to illuminate how the ecosystem operates and will also discuss how its value is strengthened when combined with the ancient japanese concept of ikigai. taken together this ikigaicentred ecosystem offers a powerful framework for understanding how higher education can support learners to uncover where they find meaning and purpose and to navigate the future of work with agency and resilience.
 the purposedriven ecosystems approach in waterloos wil and career education cultivates the skills habits and resilience in waterloo students such that they can make positive impacts on organizations which unleashes bigger picture impacts offering communities fuel to effect sustainable change for a better world.
 read more about norah mcrae here.
 dr. henri jacobs university west
 titlemaking workintegrated learning bulletproof to adversity an organizational strategy and structure design
 universities have been affected in various ways by the covid19 pandemic. it created uncertainty at universities amongst others on how to mitigate the risks posed to workintegrated learning wil.
 this presentation reflects on how the central university of technology free state cut in south africa successfully dealt with the adversity created by the pandemic. this is evidenced by the 99.6 of the 8522 wil students successfully placed for wil in the various wil modalities used at cut.
 a doctoral degree awarded for a wil strategy developed for cut formed the basis of the approach followed. the strategy included a configuration of cut structures and committees to enable a process flow based on sound wil pedagogy. it also impacted on the adoption of a wil policy and procedure that made provision for a flexible application of wil. this provided the foundation for the development of wil principles and guidelines to follow at cut to address the dangers posed to wil.
 in addition after consultation at a national wil webinar and with other statutory bodies these guidelines were endorsed by south africas minister of higher education science and technology as guidelines to implement in the higher education system in south africa.
 read more about henri jacobs here.
 med dr specialistssk
 exposure of fecral overlay welds on superheater tubes  influence of local environment on degradation
 precipitation kinetics of curich particles in super duplex stainless steels
 welding of large thickness super duplex stainless steel  microstructure and properties
 predicting ferrite fractions in single pass super duplex stainless steel welds  thermal cycle analysis and phase transformation modeling
 effect of direct energy deposition process parameters on singletrack deposits of alloy 718
 influence of heat treatments on heat affected zone cracking of gas tungsten arc welded additive manufactured alloy 718
 wirearc additive manufacturing of a duplex stainless steel  thermal cycle analysis and microstructure characterization
 a new approach to the study of multipass weldsmicrostructure and properties of welded 20mmthick superduplex stainless steel
 investigation on effect of welding parameters on solidification cracking of austenitic stainless steel 314
 monitoring thermal cycles in multipass welding
 influence of multiple thermal cycles on microstructure of heataffected zone in tigwelded super duplex stainless steel
 towards a map of solidification cracking risk in laser welding of austenitic stainless steels
 effect of welding position on properties of duplex and superduplex stainless steel circumferential welds
 influence of dilution on properties of high strength steel weld metals
 efficient welding of high strength steel
 arc efficiency for gas tungsten arc welding dcengtaw
 visual feedback for operator interaction in robotized laser metal deposition
 influence of laserdirected energy deposition process parameters and thermal posttreatments on nbrich secondary phases in singletrack alloy 718 specimens
 promoting austenite formation in laser welding of duplex stainless steelimpact of shielding gas and laser reheating
 bead by bead study of a multipass shielded metal arcwelded superduplex stainless steel
 a modified johnsoncook model for ferriticpearlitic steel in dynamic strain aging regime
 measurement of the thermal cycle in the base metal heat affected zone of cast ati  718plus tm during manual multipass tig welding
 effect of multipass tig welding on the corrosion resistance and microstructure of a super duplex stainless steel
 nitrogen loss and effects on microstructure in multipass tig welding of a super duplex stainless steel
 multipass autogenous tig welding of super duplex stainless
 strength and impact toughness of high strength steel weld metals  influence of welding method dilution and cooling rate
 effect of shielding gas on welding performance and properties of duplex and superduplex stainless steel welds
 optimising quality and productivity in welding of duplex and superduplex stainless steels
 peter harlin sandvik additive manufacturing
 robert reimers gkn aerospace
 cecilia axelsson teknikchef scania
 claes haraldsson vd tooltec.
 professor                        doctor of philosophy chemical engineering
 projektledare thomas winman epost thomas.winman@hv.se
 knowledge creation in working life
 the phrase knowledge creation in working life refers to the way work creates the circumstances for sustainable learning as well as development of knowledge and leadership in and between organisations and professions.
 knowledge for the new working life how knowledge and competence is acquired through working life how knowledge is transformed from what one learned in an educational programme to working life.
 sustainable and educational organisations how knowledge and competence is acquired to promote sustainable and educational organisations.
 development of organisations and policy how work creates the means by which knowledge is developed in and between organisations for policy development.
 health promotion in the workplace how knowledge is acquired to create health on equal terms and a healthy working life  workplace.
 development of leadership how work creates the means for development of knowledge and leadership in and between professions.
 knowledge development in international firms parttime campus kuf600
 the course addresses all phases of the knowledge development process i.e. acquisition integration and application both prior and during firm internationalisation. the course is designed in a way to help you learn
 how different types of knowledge can be obtained in home and host country environments
 which learning mechanisms are available to internationalising firms
 how acquired knowledge should be integrated across home and host country environments to create competitive advantage
 how knowledge possessed by internationalising firms can be used in their decisionmaking related to their international expansion.
 the course is examined via a course project performed in small groups and presented and discussed at a seminar.
 bachelor degree 180 ects with 90 ects in the major subject area of business administration and the course firm internationalization 75 he credits fin500 or the equivalent.
 knowledge management in supply chain management parttime campus kms610
 lov600operations and supply chain management or the equivalent.
 koldahs  competence development for organization and management of a digitized and sustainable society
 koldahs aims to identify design and implement competence development initiatives at an advanced level in management and organization regarding digitalisation and sustainable development  leadership.
 the goal is to promote lifelong learning and thereby enable local regional companies to remain competitive in a global labor market.through an expert competence program companies together with an educational actor such as university west can meet and together respond to a need to restructure and develop operational strategies. in conversations it is expressed that leadership needs to develop and also the recruitment processes. today it is not so much about recruiting the right skills but more about the difficulty of retaining it how can companies work more with socially sustainable development and with flexible sustainable leadership. together in the project we develop flexible forms that enable studies and work at the same time. these are designed from a workintegrated and fle
 snapchat
 flipped classroom
 text martin ahlin
 analysis and design with respect to electromagnetic compatibility aek600 25 hpparttime teaching takes place in hybrid form. it is possible to participate in the teaching in the classroom or via zoom. the course has two physical meetings in trollhättan. the course is given in english.
 electric vehicles elf600 75 hpparttime teaching is given on campus in trollhättan. the course is given in english.
 renewable electricity production and energy storage fee600 25 hp parttime distance with scheduled online meetings. the course is given in english.
 power quality elk600 25 hpparttime distance with scheduled online meetings. the course is given in english.
 this course improves my skills in control system design functional safety and cybersecurity
 prabhus ramanathan assistant professor university west
 supply chain manager siemens energy
 campuschef campus västervik
 latam supply chain advisory
 historia 90120 hp
 studieintyg och studieinformation
 informationsmaterial
 information om
 professor in workintegrated learning
 norwegian health professionals attitudes toward addressing sexual health with people with intellectual disabilities
 the deal is not to work
 promoting and sustaining sexual health as a health resource in prisons  a scoping review
 workplace interventions focusing on how to plan organize and design the work environment in hospital settings  a systematic review
 learning from coproducing digital courses in sexual health in higher education in norway
 a multifaceted picture of patient perspectives of health care and selfmanagement in hip and knee osteoarthritis
 measurement and outcomes of coproduction in health and social care  a systematic review of empirical studies
 what are the disadvantages of having a foreign background as a female academic and working at a university in europe?
 improving heart failure care with an experiencebased codesign approach  what matters to persons with heart failure and their family members?
 the voice of caregivers of children and adolescents with spinal cord injuries  a scoping review
 learning from cocreating an online flexible distance course in coproduction in health and welfare
 exploration of patterns of work integrated learning in coproduced online courses in higher education  findings from the sexual health project
 experience of recently graduated occupational therapists in addressing sexuality with their clients
 workintegrated learning for working life in academia  experiences from online learning activities with phd students
 sexual and reproductive health and rights content in higher education in norway  a quantitative document analysis
 workintegrated learning in phdeducation
 personal assistance services and sexual health in norway  a crosssectional study of disabled peoples experiences and attitudes regarding sexuality and personal assistants
 meeting the demands of phd supervision by changing supervision practice  a supervisors reflection on didactic change
 perceived knowledge gained from schoolbased sexuality education  results from a national populationbased survey among young people in sweden
 thats how the light gets in  studentenes evaluering av recoverykurs ved jæren recovery college
 perspectives on health care and selfmanagement of osteoarthritis among patients who desire surgery  a qualitative interview study
 enhancing staff capacity to support children with intellectual disability receiving residential services  a realist evaluation of an improvement program
 sexual health in prison with a positive approach  a scoping review protocol
 being and becoming critical friends as a sustainable support function in academic work
 work integrated learning for a working life in academia  experiences from working with phdstudents during the covid19 pandemic
 docent  associate professor in production systems
 phd in mechanical engineering
 msc in manufacturing engineering
 bsc in mechanical engineering
 coproduction between universityindustry  quality assurance of academic internal processes towards anew educational model
 digital transformation of the wood construction supply chain through building information modelling  current state of practice
 challenges of engineering education 5.0 based on i4.0 policies in brazil india japan and sweden
 building information modelling in the wood construction industry  challenges and level of implementation
 book review scheduling algorithms  author brucker peter.
 experiences in running a professional course on digitallyenabled production in collaboration between three swedish universities
 an investigation of change over sensitive heuristics in an industrial job shop environment
 a review of assembly line balancing and sequencing including line layouts
 a study of short medium and long horizon final production scheduling applying priority rules and using a discrete event simulation approach
 human values  increasing importance in the automotive production systems
 management strategies for knowledge transformation  a study of learning effects in industryunionuniversity collaborative elearning initiatives
 mind the gap  a collaborative competence elearning model between university and industry
 participants perspectives and results from competence development courses for industrial work integrated learning
 aspects of knowledge transformation in industryunionuniversity collaborations  a study of workintegrated elearning courses target norwegian industry
 elearning readiness and absorptive capacity in the manufacturing industry
 performance impact of options for routing and delivery initiation in tugger train delivery systems
 covid19 healthcare success or failure?  crisis management explained by dynamic capabilities
 may the force of lifelong learning be with you  sustainable organizational learning in heis meeting competence needs in industry
 changing traditional academic structures to meet new competence needs in industry selected thematic track  perspectives on collaboration for sustainable organisational learning
 production technology in the wooden singlefamily house industry  a case of reasoning against automation
 an empirical analysis of barriers to building information modelling bim implementation in wood construction projects  evidence from the swedish context
 book review planning and scheduling in manufacturing and services. author michael l. pinedo
 applying digital twin technology in higher education  an automation line case study
 manufacturing logistics courses aimed at competence development  perspectives of coproduction between university and industry
 an educational model for competence development within simulation and technologies for industry 4.0
 coconstruction of knowledge in workintegrated elearning courses in joint industryuniversity collaboration
 a workintegrated learning perspective of a pace global student development project
 a survey investigating current industrial scheduling practice among a crosssection of uk companies
 developing a professional course on digitalized production for swedish manufacturing industry  an interuniversity collaboration its challenges and opportunities
 mind the gap  a collaborative competence elearning model evolving between university and industry
 learning negotiations skills online by a casebased methodology through coconstruction of knowledge between industry and academy
 a novel blended learning course developed jointly between three universities to address competence development of professionals in digitalized manufacturing
 digitizing work  organizational workintegrated learning through technology mediated courses in manufacturing industry
 a novel scheduling performance comparison tool  scheduling performance profile spp graph
 a comparison of changeover time reduction through design changes and changeover sensitive heuristics
 disparities in workintegrated learning experiences for students who present as women  an international study of biases barriers and challenges
 tracey bowen maureen t.b. drysdale sarah callaghan sally smith kristina johansson colin smith barbara walsh tessa berg
 enhancing quality through work integrated learning and collaboration partnership
 makerspaces in schools  networked learning among teachers to support curriculumdriven pupil learning in programming
 what gender barriers do students face in wil placements?  a comparative study between wil and non wil students in an international empirical study.
 the professional development needs of the new zealand workintegrated learning community in comparison to international perceptions
 european cocoperative education can we formulate an mutual understanding
 the development and implementation of an educational model for community service engineering  work integrated learning and international interaction
 psychological outcomes of cooperative education and work integrated learning  an examination of attitudes and behaviors
 comparing the attributes of students in cooperative education or workintegrated learning programs in four countries
 psychological attributes and workintegrated learning  an international study
 editorial workintegrated learning in scandinavia
 how to shape a teacher?  five teachers view on participation in a mandatory course in and about higher education
 the transition from higher education to work life
 from senior student to novice worker  learning trajectories in political science psychology and mechnical engineering
 enhancing workintegrated learning wil through strategic stakeholder collaboration
 tracy bowen maureen drysdale sarah callaghan kristina johansson
 belongingness peer support social connections and wellbeing of wil students in canada germany and sweden
 professional development needs of the international workintegrated learning community
 students sense of belonging and social media
 problematising the theorypractice terminology  a discourse analysis of students  statements on workintegrated learning
 pedagogical challenges in nurse education  a case study focusing on the completion rate in theoretical education at a swedish university
 a small scaled study on pro and cons with the educational design of cooperative education
 is everyone on board  a study investigating the implementation of a programme with a new  learning design.
 work integrated learning  a marriage between academia and working life
 martin gellerstedt kristina johansson thomas winman
 the student of today  some students and teachers conceptions of the characteristics of a good student
 moving from academia och work life
 guest editorial  the inaugural swedish conference on workintegrated learning
 students conceptions of education and work
 from senior student to novice worker  learning trajectories in political science psychology and mechanical engineering
 learning more with demonstration based education
 experience design  understanding the role of technology for virtual experiences
 google scholar citations
 this projects overall purpose is to investigate the role of religion belief and values in the process of ongoing formation of national identities in the context of critical events in multicultural societies.
 erlandsson si.  punzi e. guest editors 2017 a biased adhd discourse ignores human uniqueness. international journal of qualitative studies on health and wellbeing 12sup1 1319584 doi 10.108017482631.2017.1319584
 dauman n. haza m.  erlandsson s. 2019. liberating parents from guilt a grounded theory study of parents internet communities for the recognition of adhd international journal of qualitative studies on health and wellbeing 141 1564520 doi 10.108017482631.2018.1564520
 lundin l  erlandsson si. 2017. parental discussions online through the medical discourselens. journal of childhood and developmental disorders. doi 10.417224721786.100053
 i anknytning till forskningsprojektet pågår arbetet med sammanställning och publicering av ett tematiskt kluster special issue understanding children and young adults diagnosed with adhd  a critical standpoint i international journal of qualitative studies on health and wellbeing ijqhw
 erlandsson si.  punzi e. guest editors 2017 a biased adhd discourse ignores human uniqueness. international journal of qualitative studies on health and wellbeing 12sup1 1319584 doi 10.108017482631.2017.1319584
 erlandsson s. lundin l.  punzi e. 2016. a discoursive analysis concerning information on adhd presented to parents by the national institute of mental health usa. int j qual stud health  wellbeing 11 30938
 erlandsson s.  punzi e. 2016. challenging the adhd consensus. in j qual stud health  wellbeing 11 31124
 right now we have a problem with kronox. we are working on the problem.
 eklund a. sterner a. skyvell nilsson m.  larsman p. 2024. the impact of transition programs on wellbeing experiences of work environment and turnover intention among early career hospital nurses work a journal of prevention assessment  rehabilitation doi 10.3233wor230537
 sterner a. eklund a.  skyvell nilsson m. 2023. prepared to learn but unprepared for work a cross sectional survey study exploring the preparedness challenges and needs of newly 17graduated nurses entering a hospitalbased transition program nurse education in practice 72 103782.
 gustafsson j.  thång po. 2017. workplace learning in higher education two examples from a swedish context. in bowen t.  drysdale m. t. b. eds. workintegrated learning in the 21st century global perspectives on the future 3549 international perspectives on education and society v32 bingley uk emerald publishing limited. bingley uk emerald publishing limited isbn 9781787148604.
 kolbaek d.  lundh snis u. 2019 online learning in between university studies and professional work. nordic studies in education 392 vol. 39 no 2 p. 164180.
 cam100cad och maskinelement 75 hp
 longtermplanningofcompulsarycourses20232027eng_231023.pdf
 european association for quality assurance in higher education
 1. introduction
 the quality assurance system clarifies responsibilities and provides a system and structure for monitoring conditions implementation and results. the followup shall lead to the identification of development  improvement needs a plan for measures and feedback. the followup must be documented to create opportunities for organizational learning.
 5. evaluate investigate and follow up
 the development of the complete academic environments is monitored annually.
 to ensure responsibility schedule and communication there is a followup schedule appendix 1 and a communication plan appendix 2.
 6. develop and improve
 twice a year an overall quality report is submitted to the universitys board.
 results based on quality reviews followups and measures are communicated to relevant stakeholders according to a special communication plan appendix 2.
 8. responsibility
 8.2 head of department
 8.3 heads of subdivisions
 8.4 leader for complete academic environments and program manager for primus
 8.5 leader for core area
 8.7 university director
 processes that are systematically followed up evaluated developed and documented are for example resource certificates data management plans applications for external funds career support and project support.
 8.1 head of student support library and educational development sbip
 the head of sbip is responsible for creating conditions planning and following up that sbip with its support functions is correctly dimensioned. department heads are responsible for staffing and planning for their employees and ensure that employees have the right skills knowledge and conditions for the tasks.
 8.2 quality manager
 the universitys quality manager is responsible for updating and in dialogue with the rector and quality council evaluating and developing the universitys operating system quality system and quality assurance system.
 8.3 quality council
 8.7 department faculty boards
 1 standards and guidelines for quality assurance in the european higher education area esg enqa 2015.
 intyg
 logga in extern webbplats
 ladok for students is a web service for students at university west. recommended browsers are google chrome mozilla firefox and microsoft edge. the service is also adapted for smaller screens such as mobile phones and tablets.
 in ladok for students you can among other things
 view and edit your contact information
 select courses or specialisations within programs
 view your registrations
 register for courses
 sign up for examination
 view your study results
 print transcripts and certificates verifiable certificates
 apply for a degree certificate
 the first time you log in to ladok for students you must choose a university. go to  and choose ladok for students
 at the end of the page click on ladok for students
 verification on ladok to al2 with a swedish social security number
 what is al2?
 swamid provides three confidence levels to describe how well the identity issuer knows the identity of the user
 swamid identity assurance level 1 swamid al1  unverified user
 swamid identity assurance level 2 swamid al2  confirmed user
 swamid identity assurance level 3 swamid al3  verified user
 why al2?
 ladok is an important system for students. according to swedish data protection legislation personal data must be protected against unauthorized access. anything that leads to unauthorized access or alteration of student information in ladok leads to personal data incidents. an unauthorized person who gains access to a students login can among other things interrupt the course and deregister the student from the exam as well as view and change certain personal data such as study details postal addresses email addresses and phone numbers.
 to ensure that it is the right person who logs into ladok we require users to log in with confirmed user accounts which in turn requires identification of the individual for example when resetting passwords.
 who needs to verify for al2?
 from 20240101 swamid al2 is required for students with a swedish social security number personnummer.
 students without a swedish social security number have a socalled interim social security number also known as tnumber or rnumber in ladok. the requirement for al2 does not include these students. they and can log into ladok with al1 accounts al1 is the level that is set automatically when creating an account at högskolan väst.
 what do i as an international student have to do when i change from a tnumber to a personal number?
 if you receive a swedish social security number during your studies and then the university asks you to change your social security number in ladok you must confirm your user account in order to continue to have access to ladok.
 how do i confirm my account for al2?
 you confirm your account using bankid. to get a bankid you must
 have a swedish social security number. the banks have chosen to build the system around social security numbers and currently there is no possibility to get a bank id if you dont have it.
 be a customer of one of the banks that issue bank ids
 be over 18 years of age
 you can also visit the service center and show your swedish social security number together with an id card or passport identification with a swedish social security number. you will then receive a code and can then confirm your account.
 your information such as address email and phone number in ladok for students is shared by all universities using ladok. be sure to check your information on a regular basis since it is important for the university to be able to reach you.
 to view the menu click on the icon at the top right of the page
 select my pages
 to change your details click change contact details or change address
 if you select the alternative registered address your registered address will be imported from the swedish population register
 if you for a period of time want your mail to be sent to an address other than your registered address you can change this. click temporary and enter your temporary address
 when you want your mail to be sent to your registered address again delete the temporary address.
 select courses or specialisations
 as a student on a program you sometimes have to select courses or specialisations for your further studies. if you have a choice to do the choices are presented on the home page in ladok for students.
 when the selections are to be made is displayed under selection period. show your options by clicking the show more arrow. make your selection by checking your choice. then click select
 a dialogue to confirm your selection is displayed. click confirm or cancel
 the course you have selected is displayed under current courses on the home page. it is displayed when the course is open for registration. you can also remove your selectionapplication as long as the selection period is open
 before each course start you must register on the course to confirm your participation. courses that are open for registration are displayed under the heading register on the home page.
 click on the register button or click on the arrow show more to get more information regarding the course. if you click on the arrow you get the choice to either register or cancel by clicking the button i no longer wish to attend
 if you choose to register a dialogue to confirm your registration is displayed. click confirm or cancel
 if you no longer wish to attend a dialogue to confirm your withdrawal is displayed. click confirm or cancel
 on the home page you can see the courses that you are currently registered for. if you want to discontinue your studies on a course you do that by clicking show more and then choose i no longer wish to attend
 if you choose to discontinue your studies a dialogue to confirm is displayed. click confirm or cancel
 if you are a student on a program or a course package and want to discontinue your studies completely and not just on one course you do so by selecting my education in the menu at the top right of the browser
 click on the program you want to discontinue and then i no longer wish to attend
 if you choose to discontinue your studies a dialogue to confirm is displayed. note that a discontination of a program also means that courses in the program will be discontinued. click confirm or cancel
 it is mandatory to sign up for examinations. you must always sign up for an exam both regular exams and retakes. you can sign up at the earliest 25 days before but no later than 8 days before the exam. you unregister your application in the same way.
 if there is an exam that you can sign up for it will appear on the home page when you logg in. click on the link
 to see more information regarding the exam click on the arrow show more. sign up by clicking the button
 if you choose to sign up a dialogue to confirm is displayed. click confirm or cancel
 you will also find examinations in the menu on the right. select examinations
 if you signed up for an exam but then decide not to participate you can remove your registration. to do this select the tab singed up under examinations. click the arrow show more and then the button i will not attend
 a dialogue to confirm is displayed. click confirm or cancel
 you can sign up for an examination or cancel your participation for as long as the signing up period is open.
 transcripts and certificates
 you can print four different types of transcripts and certificates. you choose whether you want a certificate in swedish or english.
 certificate of registration  shows which courses you are registered on including dates
 result certificate  shows approved results at university west
 certificate of anticipated participation  shows courses that you are admitted to
 national official transcript of records  shows approved results from all swedish universities
 in the menu on the right select transcripts and certificates
 click create and then select which type of certificate you want
 you can make restrictions on what information should be included in the certificate that you want to create. you can also choose to include some extra information depending on which certificate you have chosen. once you have made your restrictions and selected the information to be included click create or cancel if you dont want a certificate
 information about accessibility in ladok in swedish
 language culture and communication in sweden parttime campus skk102
 the course aims at introducing basic cultural concepts and theories focusing on relationships between language culture and communication.
 specific goals of the course
 upon completion of the course the student should be able to
 evaluate how communication constructs identity
 discuss how language use is culturally situated
 use simple swedish to exemplify communicative differences
 the course focuses on how cultures have an influence on language by analyzing frequently occurring linguistic phenomena in swedish. language uses in sweden are compared to language uses in other countries. a further focus is on the construction of identity and national stereotypes. special attention is paid to the analysis of language use but pictures and digital representations will also be discussed.
 the language resource centre  akademiskt språk
 if you need support with reading and writing academic texts or oral presentations the language resource centreakademiskt språk can help you. we offer guidance in reading writing and rhetoric in swedish and english for you as a student at university west.
 read more about the reading and writing tutorials on our page.book a tutorial.
 do you need support in how to plan and set up your studies?read more and book an appointment for academic study coaching.
 the language resource centre has a guide to academic reading and writing in canvas. in the english version we link to writing guides from other universities.
 for teachers
 do you want to collaborate with the language resource centre in your program or course? contact the right person below
 carina carlund  the department of health sciences and the department of social and behavioural studies
 maria persson  the department of engineering science and school of business economics and it
 international journal of social pedagogy
 papers of social pedagogy
 social pedagogy association spa
 länsförsäkringar kommunakademin väst and the center for sustainability at högskolan väst award scholarships to students who write essays that contribute to local and regional sustainable development.
 about the scholarship
 länsförsäkringar älvsborg kommunakademin väst and högskolan väst are united in their desire to make a difference locally and regionally in matters relating to democracy diversity and sustainability. this scholarship is one way to achieve that goal.
 the scholarship is awarded to students prior to essay writing partly as encouragement and partly to cover expenses incurred in connection with for example local travel. the size of the scholarship will amount to up to sek 20000 depending on how many individual scholarships that are awarded.
 the topics of the essays relevant for this scholarship must highlight sustainable development from a local andor regional point of view. all three dimensions of sustainable development ecological social and economic are of interest.
 the thesis work can create contacts with future employers. the essays will be highlighted in the municipalities they are written in and may become part of their activities.
 the local connection also means that the essays must tackle societal challenges that the municipalities and the region are facing. through this way of working you will work with actual sustainability challenges and take a handson approach in contributing to building a more sustainable society.
 assessed impact for the construction of a sustainable society locally and regionally
 assessed feasibility
 a mix between different sustainability challenges and municipalities
 that the essay is written in collaboration with one of the identified municipalities
 the essay can be written in swedish or english after consultation with the students programme and the municipality concerned
 the scholarship welcomes applicants at both bachelors and masters level.
 topics for essays 20222023
 in this round of applications themes for the essay come from vänersborg municipality and trollhättan city see below. the essays will be written in the spring of 2023 ending in june when conclusions and results will be presented.
 the application for the scholarship is now open submit your application no later than january 9 2023 to fredrik sjögren.
 the scholarship recipients are selected by a committee consisting of representatives from länsförsäkringar kommunakademin väst and the center for sustainability at university west.
 topics from the city of trollhättan
 evaluation of safety rounds
 in the city of trollhättan systematic trygghetsronder roughly safety rounds have been carried out since 2017. by the end of 2022 all neighborhoods and small towns in trollhättan municipality will have been reviewed. the municipality now wants these to be evaluated. what have the safety rounds resulted in? should they be continued or reworked in some way? or should they cease altogether?
 focus of the essayevaluate the 22 safety rounds carried out in trollhättan.
 thematic areascitizen influence security democracy codetermination crime prevention work
 the city of trollhättan has granted a project called grönare skolgårdar where 10 preschools received perennial plantings insect hotels and educational materials. the municipality is interested in an essay on biological diversity in preschools. the essay could describe what the curriculum says about the theme as well as follow up on the investment in the participating preschools including collecting opinions from them and information on how this can be used in the pedagogical work.
 it should also be mentioned that trollhättan has a new framework program for municipal buildings stating that biodiversity must be included in the planning whenever new construction is done.
 focus of the essayreview the investment in greener schoolyards in the city of trollhättan and monitor the effects on students and the pedagogical work at participating preschools in the municipality.
 thematic areasschool issues pedagogy biological diversity nature conservation
 topics from the municipality of vänersborg
 the flood programme
 the risk of rising water in lake vänern as a result of climate change is an important planning issue in vänersborg. new proposals for handling and planning are being prepared. the issues are complex and also affect electricity production shipping and the municipalities along the göta älvdalen.
 focus of the essayhow can these types of planning issues with many authorities involved be handled in practice?
 thematic areasclimate change infrastructure municipal administration crisis management urban planning.
 outdoor strategy
 the municipality of vänersborg has been granted socalled lona funds local nature conservation initiative from the swedish environmental protection agency to develop an outdoor strategy over a twoyear period. the work will start in autumn 2022. among other things associations and selected target groups will be invited to dialogue. the goal is to clarify how responsibility for outdoor life issues should be distributed within the municipal organization and what measures are needed to develop outdoor life.
 thematic areasoutdoor issues nature conservation good health environment municipal administration.
 the development of torpagärdet
 focus of the essayfollow up the processes and what they lead to.
 thematic areasurban planning segregation integration civic influence democracy.
 contact us for more information
 most of our international students rent their room or private studio apartment at lantmannavägen in the kronogården neighborhood. here eidar offers 144 rooms in 75 apartments spread over two separate buildings at a convenient bus and bicycle distance from university west 2 km.
 type of accommodation private studio apartments and rooms in shared apartments
 number of roomsstudio apartments 14 private studio apartments 61 shared apartments with 130 rooms in total
 distance to university west 2 km
 studioapartment size private studio apartment 5265 m2 shared apartment 6479 m2
 furnished yes
 rent private studio apartment 5300  6700 sek per month room in shared apartment 4500 sek per month
 included heating electricity water and broadband cable internet 100mbit.
 laundry room available in seperate building.
 bicycle storage in the basement.
 some example impressions of studio apartmentsrooms at lantmannavägen
 exchange students coming to study at university west are offered accommodation at lantmannavägen 12  14 arranged by the municipal landlord eidar housing ab  in cooperation with university west.
 most of our international students rent their room or private apartment at lantmannavägen in the kronogården neighborhood. here eidar offers 144 rooms in 75 apartments spread over two separate buildings at a convenient bus and bicycle distance from university west 2 km.
 at lantmannavägen 12  14 there are both rooms in shared apartments where you live together with 1 other student of the same gender and private apartments where you live on your own. all apartmentsrooms at lantmannavägen are furnished and the kitchen is equipped with cooking utensils. laundry facilities are located in a separate building right next to the accommodation and both buildings are equippd with a lift.
 the rent for a private apartment 5265 m2 is between sek 5300 and 6700 a month. the rent for a room 1012 m2 in a shared apartment 6479 m2 is about sek 4700  a month. the contract and rent are fixed for the full semesteracademic year. internet heating electricity and water is included in the rent. the rent is paid on a monthly basis.
 please note that the student accommodation is offered for a limited period
 autumn semester 2021from 24 august 2021 to 16 january 2022
 spring semester 2022to be confirmed
 academic year 20212022from 24 august 2021 to 15 june 2022
 students accepted for full semester studies or full academic year studies who are unable to arrive before the start of the semester must still pay rent from start of the semester as per above.
 the accommodation is for students registered for exchange studies at university west only.
 sharing room intended for one person is not allowed.
 the student accommodation is not available for families couples where the partner is not studying or children.
 pets are not allowed.
 smoking is strictly forbidden in the apartments and in the buildings
 students who are required to pay tuition fees need to have paid the tuition fee before the set deadline
 for isep students the conditions agreed upon with the isep coordinator at university west apply.
 some example impressions of apartmentsrooms at landmannavägen
 we have international students who rent a private studio apartment at lantmannavägen 38 in the kronogården neighborhood. here eidar offers 15 apartments at a convenient bus and bicycle distance from university west 3 km.
 type of accommodation private studio apartmentsnumber of roomsstudio apartments 15 apartments with 12 rooms kitchenkitchenetteaddress lantmannavägen 38 trollhättandistance to university west 3 kmstudioapartment size  2638 sqmfurnished yesrent private studio apartment 34005400 sek per monthincluded heating electricity water and broadband cable internet 100mbit.laundry room available in seperate building. bicycle storage in the basement.some example impressions of studio apartmentsrooms at lantmannavägen
 tomas lindroth
 information om vfu
 ingen information just nu.
 omexaminationer nft100
 omexaminationer sfg202
 omexaminationer bfl 600
 barndom och pedagogik childhood and education
 i work as head of the department for educational development and student aid. teaches in media production and higher education pedagogy.
 guest lecturer at the university of halmstad and the it faculty at gothenburg university.
 it support digitization of the school.
 exploring brokering situations in an innovation boundary context
 exploring tools and methods for workintegrated learning
 flipped healthcare for better or worse
 collaboration model for workintegrated learning in higher education 3rd cycle
 ict as support for learning  demanding new competence among phycians
 boundary dialogues in cocreation of ictinnovations
 attitudes towards it and use of lms in teacher education  a swedish case study
 exploring the relationship between sanctioned and unsanctioned laptop use in a 11 classroom
 a systematic process for selecting a typical case in school setting
 designing for learningin network organizations
 dynamics in an innovation boundary context  exploring a living labprocess from a community of practice perspective
 global online meetings in virtual teams  from media choice to interaction negotiation
 from tutor to producer  changes in the design space of online education
 communication in boundary practices  from media choice to interaction negotiation?
 awareness information and user behavior  a field experiment of an online collective system
 design concepts for semiformal learning in network organizations
 designing large scale workintegrated elearning
 heterogeneity and situatedness  challenges for workintegrated elearning
 a first step towards a model for teachers adoption of ict pedagogy in schools.
 an eye for an i  a framework with focus on the integration of work and learning in higher education
 equality in infrastructures for learning in higher education
 lars svensson callisto utriainen thomas winman
 thomas winman lars svensson
 design guidelines through educational mining
 etraining through web lectures
 improved quality output through computerbased training  an automotive assembly field study
 creating an arena for usecentred development of medical and health care technology
 designing the cloudboard  an ict tool for online tutoring in higher education
 competence management systems in networking organisations  designing for empowerment?
 exploring awareness
 framing workintegrated elearning with technopedagogical genres
 turning fear into trust  experiences from digitalization of work in industry and healthcare
 towards effective flexibility  learning through cowork with robots in healthcare
 nursing bedside care and the organization of expert knowledge  professional work as agencement
 international students coming to study at university west are offered accommodation at lasarettsvägen 3  5 arranged by the landlord hammar nordic ab in cooperation with university west.
 hammar nordic offers apartments located in the centre of trollhättan 15 min walking distance to the campus.
 all these apartments are private and shared accommodation. the shared accommodation includes the 2 room apartments where the students share the bedroom.all apartments are furnished and the kitchen is equipped with cooking utensils. laundry facilities are located on the ground floor and the building is equipped with a lift.
 the rent for the studio apartments 29 m2 are estimated to be sek 5279 a month. the 2 room apartments are estimated to be around sek 6400 this is the total rent that will be split between two students.the contracts and rent are fixed for the full semester or academic year. internet heating electricity and water are included in the rent. the rent is paid on a monthly basis.
 laser metal deposition using powder as an additive  lmdp
 lmdp utilises a high power laser in order to create a melt pool into which the powder is fed. the powder is delivered into the melt pool through a nozzle carried by an inert gas usually argon or helium. the nozzle used in this project is coaxial to the laser beam and both the nozzle and the laser optics is mounted on an abb robot which is used as the guiding system for the process. lmdp manufactured components are built through deposition of adjacent weld beads in multiple layers until the final geometry is achieved.
 this project is namely directed at applications for the aerospace industry where alloy718 is an important material. alloy718 is a nickeliron based superalloy that makes up approximately 30  of the material in a commercial jet engine. additionally alloy718 has a comparatively good weldability in comparison with other superalloys. this makes it a good alternative for the lmdp process.
 in the aerospace industry there is a high demand for reduction of waste material which for certain parts are very high. lmdp has shown great potential in reducing waste material through near net shape production. however in the aerospace industry there is also a high demands on the material integrity and therefore there is a great need to improve the lmdp manufacturing processes and to understand how the process parameters influences the material in terms of microstructure and defects. the relationship between the main process parameters which are the laser power powder feeding rate and traverse speed and the deposit characteristics in terms of microstructure surface finish and defects is crucial to understand and is the main focus in this project.
 lasrex  laser metal deposition using hastelloy x blown powder for structural component repair
 laser welding of hastelloy x has been found to cause heat affected zone liquation cracking. this is also a potential concern when using laser metal deposition with powder as feedstock material with multilayer material deposition as during lmdp generally providing a greater risk of crack formation. the thermal profile and its effect on microstructure and mechanical properties is therefore a practical concern for the industrial partners in this project. a suitable process window is therefore needed. the combination of the complex metallurgy of the material and the multiparameter environment of lmdp necessitates the development of a suitable process window tailored to both material and application. being able to understand and control the material changes and effects on mechanical performance enable the application of the technique in production and could provide a more controlled and repeatable repair process of cast and welded gas turbine components. the project is therefore of great interest to producers of structural gas turbine components for aerospace gkn aerospace and landbased applications siemens.
 i am currently interested in the significance of segregation and place in the city for issues of local governance and citizenship in sweden.
 i am member of the international political science association ipsa.
 i am a past president of the south african association for political science saaps 20162018 and a longstanding member of saaps.
 i am a longstanding editor on theoria a journal of social and political theory
 i am asked to grade masters and phd theses regularly.
 city politics governance participation citizenship south africa urban south
 this project aims to increase the use of aluminum alloys using innovative laser welding tools as well as to significantly reduce the costly pretests in the welding of alloys in the production development phase.
 laser welding is well established in many industries thanks to high productivity quality and flexibility. however laser welding of aluminum is associated with high risk of weld defects such as hot cracks distortion solidification cracking and porosity. the quality of the weld depends on many variables in a huge complexity. a simulation model will be developed to predict increased risk of cracking and distortion. it will be a practical tool in the teaching as well as for material producers engineers and welding engineers.
 the project also aims to develop guidelines in a userfriendly format to optimize the process robustness which will be very helpful for welders and welding engineers and save a lot of time in the development of production. the project is mainly focused on the demands of the automotive industry but also aerospace industry and subcontractors is involved.
 how can future production become more sustainable with the help of advanced technology automation and smart learning?
 to take new steps towards development and innovation experiences need to be crosslinked with new knowledge. here the swedish production symposium plays an important role in strengthening collaboration between academia and industry.
 very important platform
 swedish production symposium is a very important platform says anna öhrwall rönnbäck professor at luleå university. here young phd students and professors  and everyone in between  meet to present their latest results. exciting lecturers and insights also provide valuable environmental analysis says anna öhrwall rönnbäck professor at luleå university.
 out of a total of 150 participants around 40 phd students from various parts of sweden were present. one of them was natalie agerskans who is head of the network for phd students padok.
 an example of the developed collaboration between academia and the business sector is the swedish production symposium 2024 where we have been able to demonstrate how our latest advancements in areas such as advanced materials and smart manufacturing processes not only enable a more sustainable production but also enhance the competitiveness of swedish companies.
 it is through such initiatives that we can make significant progress towards a more sustainable industrial future which is crucial in todays economy says joel.
 watch the film from the conference
 we began from scratch and in three years we have become an international leader in the field.
 most published articles
 with the companies different areas of expertise in their respective industries we have gained a better understanding of what needs and requirements are relevant. this has been crucial in allowing us study the right things.
 focus on superalloy 718
 it is important to understand how hightemperature materials behave when producing components with this type of technology. how does the material handle being heated and cooled repeatedly how does am material behave during welding and during subsequent heat treatment what type of postprocessing works best and for which applications and so on?
 many benefits from am
 for example you can produce more efficient and more environmentally friendly aircraft engines since it is possible to use lighter designs and materials that can withstand higher temperatures. this results in engines with higher efficiency and thus lower fuel consumption.
 producing small series becomes more flexible and financially viable. companies also see opportunities to reduce dependency on subcontractors and shorten production time by having production inhouse or in the immediate region.
 more about sumannext. watch an interview with peter harlin from sandvik additive manufacturing which is one of the project partners.
 leafstir  lightweight and leakproof electronic assembly by friction stir welding in bev
 the novelty of this project is to reduce the weight cost and time for electronic assembly by replacing large number of fasteners and gaskets using friction stir welding with enhanced joint strength and excellent leak tight performance.
 mer information om lean introduktionskurs
 mer information om lean inspirationsdag
 learning and caring for sustainable health
 lina week 37 october 2022  programme
 more information in the flyer
 olkc 2022 is hosted by university west september 79 2022.  read more on the website here.
 it healthcare and personal wellbeing
 ail as an educational approach
 upgrade teacher education and school digitalization
 learning interviews in preschool a perspektive of learning at work
 innovation management for a digitalized hotel industry
 we want to understand how hotel organizations organize and lead innovation processes to respond to the industrys rapid digitization and the influence of digital platforms on the hotel industry.
 the linacalender
 if you leave sweden in order to live abroad for at least one year you must notify the tax agency at least one week before departure. should you cancel or postpone your departure please notify the tax agency on the previously stated day of departure at the latest. if you forget to submit the notification on time please send it as soon as possible.
 to notify the tax agency that you are moving abroad download the form at this addressplease fill in as much information as possible as it will ease the handling of your notification.if you have any questions about what is applicable to your circumstances please contact
 see quick facts about population registration
 are you active curious and have a drive for change? prepare for a leading role in the transition to industry 5.0. youll learn to lead develop and organize digital change within business and industry. as a leader youll facilitate ongoing and inclusive learning and collaboration. your englishtaught programme is founded on the principles of workintegrated learning in which you will receive a degree of master of arts 120 credits. youll build handson experience in how knowledge is created disseminated and implemented sustainably in digitalized organizations. to succeed in your studies you must master the english language both written and spoken.
 leading for the future
 digital transformation impacts the manufacturing process itself but also the overall management organisation and governance of businesses and organisations. thus industries and organisations are in great need of leaders to help them prepare for future changes initiated by the digital transformation of industry 4.0. this programme gives you the tools to develop a business or industry characterised by digitalisation. on graduation youll be able to work within and between different organisational structures to lead drive change uncover problems problematise solutions and find practical solutions.
 youll learn
 how the new technologies of industry 4.0 are affecting industry and leadership technologies include blockchain business intelligence bi artificial intelligence ai robotic process automation rpa internet of things technology iot virtual reality vr and threedimensional printing and scanning 3d
 how to prepare for future changes initiated by industry 4.0 and a continuously evolving digital transformation
 how to implement broad leadership providing individuals employees and other leaders with opportunities to influence this development
 how to facilitate knowledgesharing throughout all levels of an organisation
 how to collect and analyse data
 how ongoing organisational learning processes and consequences affect working life and business outcomes
 how to work with complex societal challenges
 work integrated learning consists of several integrated components including
 problembased learning
 projectbased learning
 work integrated learning runs through the entire programme. you will simultaneously study and engage in activities such as data collection optional internship etc. while facing socalled complex problems that require more than one theoretical perspective to solve. reflection and collaborative learning with a constant interplay between theoretical modelsperspectives and practical applications structure your course.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the broader fields of wil business administration and informatics. after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad.
 its very important for a company to have good leaders
 develop active leaders who have an agile leadership
 director of lina
 stresshantering
 capfor finansiell planering
 iosoft ab
 margareta wallin peterson professor emerita
 urban wass docent
 victoria sjöstedt ofr
 docent and senior lecturer in logistic
 phd in computer and systems sciences
 docent informatik
 childrens learningbyteaching with a social robot versus a younger child  comparing interactions and tutoring styles.
 tracing expansive learning in computersupported collaborative teaching
 workplace workintegrated learning  supporting industry 4.0 transformation for small manufacturing plants by reskilling staff
 trouble and repair in childrobot interaction  a study of complex interactions with a robot tutee in a primary school classroom
 nordic innovation networks in education  dealing with educational challenges with cross boarder collaboration and user driven design
 robotics and quality  a sociomaterial analysis of assembly line
 tpack in situ  a designbased approach supporting professional development in practice
 simulation and serious games for firefighter training  challenges for effective use
 sound bubbles for productive office work
 international journal of journal of child development  special issue using technology to enhance rehabilitation and empower people with special needs
 didactical designs in use  exploring technological pedagogical and content knowledge
 technology rehabilitation and empowerment of people with special needs
 designing activitybased and contextsensitive ambient sound environments in openplan offices
 mathematical literacy for everyone using arithmetic games
 can teachers fragmented work situation jeopardize professional development of future teaching practices?
 challenges of achieving ict competent teachers through continuing professional development  teachers perspectives
 information and communication technology  a personcentered approach to stroke care
 telehealth with 3d games for stroke rehabilitation
 an educational math game with a teachable agent and a social chat
 the dual role of humanoid robots in education  as didactic tools and social actors
 new teacher roles with social robots as actors in the classroom
 unpacking the role of boundaries in computersupported collaborative teaching
 augmenting gamebased learning with a robot tutee
 creating a boundary practice by codesign
 my sound space  an attentional shield for immersive redirection
 the sound bubble  a contextsensitive space in the space
 using virtual reality technologies to support everyday rehabilitation
 robot as tutee
 the sound bubble  an aesthetic additive design approach to actively enhance acoustic office environments
 journal of pain management  special issue using virtual reality technologies to support everyday rehabilitation
 introduction  using technology to enhance rehabilitation and empower people with special needs
 progression in practice  development of tpack in didactical designs
 the goalkeeper  a tool for monitoring learning outcomes in phd education
 a teachable agent game engaging primary school children to learn arithmetic concepts and reasoning
 challenges of implementing interactivity in the classroom
 educational technology in teaching  what do teachers perceive they need in order to develop their professional competence?
 a teachableagentbased game affording collaboration and competition  evaluating math comprehension and motivation
 transferring teaching to testing  an unexplored aspect of teachable agents
 a teachableagent arithmetic games effects on mathematics understanding attitude and selfefficacy
 staff member at vice chancellors team.
 lennart de haan  alumnus from the netherlands
 why did you apply to us at university west?
 i had always wanted to study abroad so when i found this university that had both the programme that i wanted to study master in manufacturing engineering and was located in a beautiful nature area it was a very easy decision for me.
 why did you apply to the master in manufacturing engineering?
 i enjoy a combination of practical and theoretical work and this programme offers both.
 learning how to work with and program industrial robots at the production technology center was definitely a highlight.
 can you describe the environmentculture at the unviersity?
 trollhättan is a small city because of this everything is within walking distance and it has a very cozy feeling. besides that the city is surrounded by nature which is perfect for hikes.
 unfortunately due to corona i havent been able to attend large student parties but the bars and smaller parties that i have been to have been lots of fun especially because youre surrounded by students from all over the world.
 the education that we received was both practical and theoretical making me a wellrounded engineer. besides that due to the internationality of the students im able to work with engineers from all around the world.
 programchef primus phd production technology
 smart industry sweden  a collaborative industrial graduate school
 augmented reality for aidriven inspection?  a comparative usability study
 multimodal augmented reality and subtle quidance for industrial assembly  a survey and ideation method
 assessment based information needs in manual assembly
 enhancing future assembly information systems  putting theory into practice
 understanding the complex needs of automotive training at final assembly lines
 instructor based training versus computer based training  a comparative study
 headmounted augmented reality support for assemblers of wooden trusses
 challenges of handling assembly information in global manufacturing companies
 data and information handling in assembly information systems  a current state analysis
 workintegrated learning and cocreation of knowledge  design of collaborative technology enhanced learning activities
 preparatory virtual training of assembly operators  an explorative study of different learning models
 on this page you can find information about
 what happens during a study term
 as the start of the semester and as the course starts its important that you as a teacher and  or program manager support the students with information so that they can get a good start in their studies. this page contains information and tips for you of how to facilitate that work.
 what happens during the start of the semester?important dates of the academic calendar
 the first day at the start of the term is intended to be an opportunity where programme students are scheduled to meet teachers and other students and have a first day to be welcomed at university west and to their studies. tips and more information on how such a day can be set up can be found further down in this guide
 autumn term startduring the start of autumn term the university arrange plenty of support. staff are available who can answer your students questions about their education. during the first day the students are supported in finding the designated room according to the set schedule and receives support in creating a west card.
 spring term startduring the start of spring term the university receives fewer new students on site than at the start of the autumn term. there will be some extra staff to support the students we refer also to the service center.
 smygstart  sneak startsmygstart is arranged for all national students both before the spring and autumn semester the week before the semester begins. during this days students get lots of good tips and are instructed of things they need to know as a new student former students can also participate in this. during the week introduction days also take place for our international students and activities are synchronized if possible.
 here you can read more about smygstartsveckan
 how to start up your canvas course
 canvas pages are created automatically and are then available to students when they have registered starting in early august. the courses in canvas are created on june 10 before ht and 8 weeks before the start of the course for vt.
 keep in mind that
 check that the correct bibliography and syllabus are linked to the canvas page of the course 8 weeks before the start of the course the correct version must be determined.
 it is important to have a welcome greeting to your students on the canvas course it must be in place when the course is published for students 4 weeks before the start of the course. students should feel welcomed by the text and get the feeling that they know what the courseprogramme entails. also describe how the first opportunity of the course is held in terms of date and time as well as locationlink to the zoom room and any literature connected to the opportunity.
 if necessary add other teachers who will teach the course teachers who are scheduled in planum are automatically added to the course.
 publish the course pm 2 weeks before course start.
 learn more about canvas
 there is an introduction module in canvas  here the student will find most of what is needed to get started with their studies. this module is automatically added to all canvas courses.
 introductory course to canvas for educators and general information about canvas at university west.
 each canvas course has its own zoom room. click into the meeting in the usual way and then become a participant in the meeting. to take over the hosting of the emeeting use a host key provided in the course. read more about how to access host key for zoom website.tips and tricks on educating in a digital environment akademus.
 course information
 the course information page in swedish gives you an overview of the course and you can directly see the course plan reading list test sessions which teachers are connected to the course and schedule as well as closer to the start of the course and also see how many students have been on the courses canvas page.
 what to think about the schedule before the start of the semester
 as a teacher you will find the schedule in the canvas calendar or in the course overview. you can also go to the module courses in the employee portal to find the link to kronox.
 students find their schedule in the calendar in canvas  check that this is displayed correctly. keep in mind that activities that you add to the canvas course become part of the students schedule. this can be for example assignments and supervision times. note activities that are added to the canvas calendar are not synced to kronox.
 in the canvas calendar you can choose how you want to view the schedule. feel free to try to choose between the week month and agenda views in the calendar to find the layout that suits you best
 check that the schedule is correct in the course 4 weeks before the start of the course it is available
 what information do students receive before the education?
 information that the students receive from the university
 dispatch  newsletter see when and what information the student receives on his journey to the university in picture no. 1
 welcome page see example of a personal start page in picture no. 2
 students receive a regular newsletter during the term.
 example of information that is sent to the student  from registration to the start of education picture no. 1.
 example of a personal start page image 2.
 university director
 library and study support
 library and study support is led by division head catarina lindhé.
 the library room is a natural meeting point and workplace at the university. here you will find a generous and inclusive environment with 361 seats in varying forms distributed in all spaces from individual workplaces with computers to group rooms quiet reading room resource room and more.
 språkvingen provides support in collaboration with the core operationsteaching faculty in the form of language guidance and support in essay writing and scientific writing
 the library has dropin and support for students and teachers in several forms and areas.
 the library room is a natural meeting point and workplace at the university.
 the public is also welcome to use the library and its resources. read more about the librarys activities at bibliotek.hv.se or at meet the library.
 phone
 library assistant
 we will close hvdesktop virtual online computer from 1630 pm on the 3rd of august 2022 to perform a licencefix on hvdesktop. it will take about 4 hours to complete the work. until further notice hvdesktop will not be accessible.
 phd candidate
 lifelong learning environments
 learning on equal terms knowledge production that contributes to sustainable equal terms for quality of life and learning increased participation and good future opportunities through education and lifelong learning environments.
 light weight chassi through improved fatigue properties of welded truck components
 a large part of the weight of a truck is due to the chassie. stronger and stronger demands are expressed for lighter vehicles in order to increase the pay load. through this the specific fuel consumption is decreased the amount of exhaust is lowered and the transport economy improved. to achieve a noticeable reduction in weight parts of the chassie construction will be examined with the respect to the ability to reduce the weight. components which are of interest in this respect are axles antiroll bars etc. these components are today made from forged or cast materials. one possibility to optimize the weight of the components is to fabricate the components from smaller parts in high strength materials and join them by welding. however many of the materials used have limited weldability and their properties after welding are not very well known. especially the fatigue properties are dimensioning for many components and these must be improved for welded joints.
 light weight solutions for highperformance components by additive manufacturing
 the project goal is to extend application of the ebm and slm techniques to next materials and applications in gas turbine components.
 electron beam melting ebm and selective laser melting slm are the most adopted powderbed additive manufacturing am technologies for production of some aerospace engine components and medical implants based on tialloys where technology has proven its weight saving nature and explicit design freedom.
 this is of strategic importance for the swedish powder manufacturers to enter the fastgrowing market of the materials for am. hence a successful project execution will allow for development of base power material as well as design and manufacturing strategies for am fabrication of highvalue components based on nibased superalloys. this will allow for significantly shorter development time and decrease the weight of the highvalue components through combination of improved design and properties. the demonstrator components produced in the project will be used to prove proposed concept and inspire future product development of light weight components fabricated by am.
 lightboard studio
 what is a lightboard?
 a lightboard is a whiteboard in glass that is lit up and filmed from the front. when the camera is in front of the board you get better contact with the viewers as you can both write on the board and be facing the camera. the text is visible in front of you. before the recording it is good to think through which clothes to use so that the text appears as good as possible.
 how do i use the lightboard studio?
 in the studio you use your own computer for recording. you connect to zoom and use its recording function. you can pause recording if you want to clean the board. you can also have participants via zoom when lecturing. in the studio you will find a manual for how to start the lightboard and make settings for recording.
 how do i get access to the studio?
 if you have questions about the studio contact the ict educational developers at akademus.
 lightboardstudio
 like a testbed for ideas
 how can knowledge development and innovative digital technologies help us develop capabilities and skills for a resilient future?
 participants from all over the world
 business and academia
 parallel to this session on the first day a seminar focused on how academia and business can collaborate even better took place among other things. there jon eklöf from gkn aerospace started on the topic lived experience from the shopfloor about future industry needs of ai. among the participants was emma wikström business area manager development center combitech sweden. it is important to interact with academia and find platforms where we can meet like here. being able to both talk about your own experiences and listen to others gives a lot.
 keynotes and workshops
 one of the best conferences
 amir hajbolouri comments and summarizes there is a general consensus from the participants that the university has both the capacity and talent to organize international conferences of this caliber which i think is an important and positive signal to take with us.
 during tuesday evenings dinner the following awards were presented
 best paper award designing a large language model based open data assistant for effective use by till carlo schelhorn karlsruhe institute of technology ulrich gnewuch university of passau and alexander maedche karlsruhe institute of technology
 best student paper award wasnt expecting that  using abnormality as a key to design a novel usercentric explainable ai method by tobias jahn philipp hühn and maximilian förster from university of ulm
 best prototype paper award upside down dialectics a system for generating synthetic design conversation by alice cai  harvard university celine offerman  tu delft shiyan zhang  lancaster university management school lydia b. chilton  columbia university and jeffrey v .nickerson  stevens institute of technology
 lifetime achievement award jeffrey parsons memorial university of newfoundland
 contact amir hajbolouri associate professor in informatics university west amir.hajbolouri@hv.se  46701804709
 maureen drysdale university of waterloo canadachristine arsenault university of toronto canadaclay spinuzzi the university of texas at austin usa
 welcome to lina week
 welcome to a week full of activities you are welcome to drop in whenever you are able to. no registration is needed. also dont miss out on the gala dinner on friday which is open to everyone
 the programme
 10.3012.00 thebe seipobi  a work integrated learning assessment strategy to optimise student learning at the central university of technology south africa.live presentation in englishroom j113
 14.0015.00  tracey bowen maureen drysdale sarah callaghan kristina johansson  gender rhetorics and wil. live workshop in englishroom j113
 16.0017.00   ngoc buu cat nguyen  a framework of learning analyticsintegrated learning design for employed adult learners. online presentation in englishzoom
 9.0010.20     stephen billett  the educative experiences constituting work integrated education. keynote in english hybridroom j111zoom
 10.3011.30tracey bowen maureen drysdale  aligning expectations across wil stakeholders visualizing potential challenges and barriers.live workshop in englishroom e203
 11.3012.15anh truong  studying intraprofessional and interprofessional learning processes initiated by an educational intervention applying a qualitative design with multimethod approach a study protocol.hybrid presentation in englishsession chair stephen billetroom f410zoom
 12.0013.00   christèl åberg lisbeth hellström  avatar i klassrummet.live presentation in swedishlunchsandwich is provided room g122
 14.0015.00   maureen drysdale sarah callaghan  experiences shared on reddit regarding wil wellness and mental health. live presentation in englishroom e203
 bildung the humanities arts and sciences  beginning lectures  theme science philosophy and religionlive workshop in english room albertsalen f104
 13.0014.30 klas modin  to craft knowledge  a beginning lecture for engineering students.
 14.4516.15 stefanos kourkoulakos  beginning as enduring and fleeting deed or the how and why of philosophy in platos protagoras.
 16.3018.00 sven tengstam  money christianity and economics relationships and tensions.
 9.0010.20     henri jacobs  key concepts for wil programme design and implementation to enhance employability and career development.keynote in english hybridroom f316zoom
 10.3012.00 anri wheeler  using discourse analysis to analyse the work integrated learning policies at the central university of technology south africa.live presentation in englishsession chair stephen billetroom h310
 11.3012.00   nataliya galan  fueling entrepreneurial passion among university graduates by integrating learning experiences within and outside the university. insights from a configurational study. live presentation in englishroom j103
 15.0016.00ellinor torsein  relationship learning in suppliercustomer relationships.live presentation in english room j103
 bildung the humanities arts and sciences  beginning lectures  theme literature and arthybrid workshop in english room f131zoom
 13.0014.30 catherine toal  the novel at the end of the world.
 14.4515.00adania shibli  literary cracks.
 thursday 610
 9.0010.20     yrjö engeström  the instruments of change laboratory tools for promoting expansive learning and transformative agency at work.keynote in english hybridroom f131zoom
 12.0013.00   camilla gjellebaek linnea carlsson  crossborder doctoral seminar.live seminar with workshop elements in swedishnorwegianlunchsandwich is providedroom j105
 13.0015.00stephen marshall scott strachan louise logan ed coyle julie sonnenbergklein  engaging students with problembased learning and competency development through vertically integrated projects vip for sustainable development.hybrid workshop in englishsession chair stephen billetroom i108zoom
 bildung the humanities arts and sciences  beginning lectures  theme lecture performance and moving imagelive workshop in english room albertsalen f104
 13.0014.30 karl dahlquist  framing aby warburg a beginning lecture in the anthropocene.
 14.4516.15 lindsay goss  how to begin again the actors political pedagogy.
 16.3018.00 david wingate  a film and tv dramaturg at work  a six hour educational film series and the history of the modern individual.
 9.0010.20     annalisa sannino  learning expansively and acting transformatively via digital means formative interventions to address acute societal challenges. keynote in english hybridroom f131zoom
 10.3011.00ulf andersson anh truong  virtual care for the virtually dying.hybrid presentation in swedishroom f206zoom
 11.1512.15 panel debate with university wests three former vicechancellorsin swedishformer vicechancellors olof blomqvist lars ekedahl and kerstin norén together with vicechancellors adviser lars svensson in a joint panel focusing on the development of wil at university west and their reflections and views on this. room f206
 13.0014.00   panel debate with student representativesin swedishunion chair elin bergman union vicechairman madeleine sandberg former union chair paulina samuelsson and phd student linnéa carlsson join the panel to discuss wil and its development from a student perspective.room f206
 bildung the humanities arts and sciences  beginning lectures  theme society politics and the futurehybrid workshop in english room f131zoom
 13.0014.30 tuba inal  international law and politics  a beginning lecture about norms and change.
 14.4516.15 ingar solty  from the pandemic and russias war in ukraine to a new bloc confrontation? futuring in the worldhistorical postinterregnum.
 16.3018.00concluding conversation and what to do next
 15.1516.30erfarenheter och diplomutdelning från ailcertifieringendiploma awarding ceremony for wil certification in swedishroom entré ailfor more information about the programme read here
 we are excited to invite you to our gala dinner tickets to this event will include a 2course dinner and entertainment.
 date friday october 7th at 18.30
 location polhemssalen university west
 wed love for you to join us and celebrate the finale of lina and the weeks programme
 maureen drysdale unviersity of waterloo canadachristine arsenault university of toronto canadaclay spinuzzi the university of texas at austin usa
 linda developing materials for future aero engine manufacturing
 linda is one of 16 externally employed doctoral students at the industrial graduate school smart industry sweden. she is doing her doctoral studies at university west and is collaborating with several industrial partners including gkn aerospace which manufactures components for aerospace engines.
 powder bed additive manufacturing am is of great interest to aerospace and other lowvolume manufacturing industries. the technology involves building a product layer by layer using a metal powder and for example a laser as an energy source linda explains.
 the technology is a competitive alternative to traditional techniques such as casting and forging. powder bed am manufacturing is more efficient requires less material and offers lower production costs for smaller batches. topology optimisation allows lighter components to be made so the aircraft engine weighs less and requires less fuel.
 this technology can also produce much more complex structures than is possible with conventional techniques. in other words component design can be smarter says linda.
 my focus is on developing a basic understanding of how the properties of titanium are affected in this manufacturing technique. among other things im investigating how different parameters of the manufacturing process affect the properties microstructure and quality of the material. im conducting a range of tests in our lab for example with different fractions of titanium powder says linda.
 there are many different factors that affect the properties of the metal and it takes a long time to build up understanding and knowledge of each element.
 network gives insight into other industries
 being involved in this network is a huge benefit. its broadening my horizons in production engineering. im learning a lot from the other doctoral students and gaining insights into the industries they work in. its clear that were all part of the great technological transition that is taking place across industry.
 my goal is to build broad expertise in both metallic materials and mechanical testing.
 parental narratives online about adhd
 online narratives about panic attacks  interpreted within a psychodynamic framework
 parental discussions online through the medical discourselens
 adolescents selfdefining internet experiences
 the experience of tinnitus and its interaction with unique life histories
 mothers and fathers insights into teenagers use of the internet
 the experience of tinnitus and its interaction with unique life histories  life events trauma and inner resources narrated by patients with tinnitus
 a narrative analysis of online discussions about selfharm within an attachment framework
 a discursive analysis concerning information on adhd presented to parents by the national institute of mental health usa.
 soly erlandsson linda lundin elisabeth punzi
 intraindividual variability in tinnitus patients  current thoughts and perspectives.
 my current projects focus on collaboration regarding problematic school absence this is my postdoc project funded by forte. i and a colleague from university west study young peoples trust in the municipality as a place and organization in a collaborative project with grästorp municipality. furthermore i study together colleagues from the swedish and south african universities childrens opportunities for influence from outside in a first stage the respective countries legislation.
 strengthening parenting practices and capacity in times of temporariness a study on preventative social work at family centers with families who migrated to sweden 2022 2024 forte
 social workers as targets for integration
 integration work as a situated communicative practice  assuming establishing and modifying cultural differences
 the problempresentation in integration work  construction of information needs for newly arrived immigrants
 social work in a multilingual world  editorial
 transforming biographical experience into occupational accountability  paraprofessional integration workers efforts to professionalise integration support in sweden
 the arguing processes of developing standards  to win hearts and minds of the users
 linnea åberg thomas winman
 thomas winman linnea åberg
 abstract book  wil conferens 2024  2nd international concference on workintegrated learning
 social aspects of strategizing industrial digitalization
 strategizing organizational capabilities for industrial digitalization  exploring managers technological frames
 to digitalize or not? navigating and merging human  and technology perspectives in production planning and control
 briefing  calling for a normcritical perspective of digitalisation
 taking care of digital initiatives  managers approaching industrial digitalization
 wil22 79 december 2022 international conference on work integrated learning university west trollhättan sweden  abstract book
 taking responsibility for industrial digitalization  navigating organizational challenges
 triggering sustainable professional agency  using change laboratory to tackle unequal access to educational success collectively
 content analysis on management discourse in digitalization  a work in progress discussion paper
 qualified teaching assistant
 suppliers invoices for the health science accounting and it individual and society departments.
 customers invoices
 my special interests focus on how the collaborations actually work with aims towards establishing cocreational cultures.privately i live in a cottage in the woods with my little family pets and a big yarn cabinet. my interests away from work revolve around words and languages pens and paper and knitting.
 quality manager
 live recording of the power barometer 2023
 the media academy presented the results of this years maktbarometer.
 on monday akademus media technicians were visited by the media academy which recorded its presentation of this years maktbarometern a compilation of who has the most power on social media in sweden.mediekademin has presented its compilation since 2017 and this is the second time that university west has had the privilege of recording it. we have also recorded förtroendebarometern which will be presented in the spring.
 the production can be seen on svt forum on tuesday october 3 and on the media academys youtube channel.
 recent publications
 asatiani a.  norström l. 2023. information systems for sustainable remote workplaces. the journal of strategic information systems 323 101789.
 lindquist m. norstrom l.  lindman j. 2023. needsolution pairing and the role of emerging technology in a public sector innovation process. in european conference on information systems ecis kristiansand june 1114 2023.
 norström l. magnusson j.  mankevich v. 2022. the great divide empirical evidence of a decoupling of digital transformation and sustainability. in international conference on electronic participation pp. 7388. cham springer nature switzerland.
 clinical learning in times of crises. how covid 19 affected nursing students clinical learninganette johnsson annalena eklund jan gustafssonnyckel högskolan väst
 workintegrated learning in swedish primary healthcare a study of diebetes specialist nursess professional development and learning in a digital setting using personcentred care approach doktorandprojektalma dautovic susanne andersson ulla fredriksson larsson eva brink högskolan väst
 breakingfences  fostering norm awareness through norm creativity in european health science educationhenrik eriksson elisabeth dahlborg susanna höglund arveklev ivan andrés castillo kicki klaeson högskolan väst slezska univerzita v opave tjeckien instituto politecnico de braganca portugal
 location place and space in religious education
 the findings will be published in a book with the title location space and place in religious education münster waxmann verlag. editors martin rothgangel geir skeie kerstin von brömssen hansgünter heimbrock. planned to be published early 2017.
 log in with mfa
 twostep verification or multifactor authentication mfa enhances security during login and is required for logging in to certain digital services such as your email and microsoft word. mfa means that you must use a mobile app to verify your login.
 to be able to use all university digital services you need to verify your login through the microsoft authenticator app. to get started you need to activate multifactor authentication mfa. its easiest to do it via a computer.
 see the guide below. make sure to take your time and read the instructions.
 mfa  twostep verification
 how do i know if i have already activated mfa?
 here you can find a guide showing how to check if you have already activated mfa.
 what happens if i dont activate mfa?
 if you dont activate mfa meaning you wont be able to twofactor authenticate your login you wont be able to use certain digital services such as your email or microsoft word.
 what to do if i dont have an elegitimisation?
 you need to contact servicecenter@hv.se
 what is mfa?
 multifactor authentication also known as twostep verification means that during login you must use at least one additional authentication method in addition to your password. this is done by approving your login through the microsoft authenticator mobile app.
 why is university west introducing mfa?
 it enhances security during login. at univeristy west efforts are underway to enhance information security. requiring multifactor authentication is part of this security initiative.
 initially this applies to our microsoft services. later it may be introduced for additional systems.
 room number main entrance
 logic control engineering parttime campus sdt200
 the course aims to provide insight into how industrial control systems are used and programmed an automatic machine. in the course plc programmable logic controller is used and the industrial programming standard iec611313 is followed.
 in the course you will also learn the basic logical control and logical expressions and how these are used to control machines. we create programs that are loaded into a plc and tested against physical machines in the laboratory. the lab experiments are developed to learn the abovementioned objectives.
 sdt200 has the following modules.
 1. lectures of iec611313 programming standard plc programming techniques arithmetic and boolean algebra.
 2. plc programming laboratory exercises
 the course is a basic course that aims to provide basic knowledge and understanding of the logistics area as a whole and the logic on which logistics is based. the overall logistical perspective and its basic logic is central to the course as are logistical connections and problems. important parts of the overall logistical perspective are flows hierarchical planning and control as well as sustainability aspects. various key indicators and discussion about their role and impact is dealt with within the course. the holistic logistic approach and basic concepts within logistics are covered throughout the course.
 distancelearning
 written examination at campus trollhättan
 teaching through scheduled zoomlectures.
 epm100ethics and personal goalsetting and
 inr100role of engineers and
 ine102industrial engineering or
 ine103industrial engineering online or the equivalent.
 aggestam l. and elison i. 2024 learning and quality assurance in the same package 18th annual international technology education and development conference inted valencia spanien isbn 9788409592159
 andersson r. and pardillobaez y.  the six sigma framework improves the awareness and management of supplychain risk the tqm journal 17542731 doi 10.1108tqm0420190120 2020.
 borgström b. hertz s.  jensen l.m. 2023. road haulier competition implications for supply chain integration. in b. associate prof. ágota ed. supply chain  perspectives and applications pp. ch. 9. intechopen.
 svensson a. jungselius b. aggestam l. and johansson m. 2024. factors for employees increased wellbeing in the global production industry crosscultural business conference ccbc 2024 steyr austria may 1517.
 roy andersson
 professor                        associate professor
 one of the many reasons luigia chose to apply to this university was because university west is the only university that offers the international bachelor programme in politics and economics ippe in english. moreover she feels that university west is a very prestigious university which hosts students from different cultures and backgrounds. the staff also contributes tirelessly to making everyone feel at home.
 luigia tells us she has a big passion for economics people and different cultures. the main reason why she applied to ippe was because the programme offers a mix between international relations politics and economics.
 i am a polyglot so i am truly interested in languages people and different cultures. this programme offers everything i love and want to work with in the future.
 according to luigia the programme has far exceeded her expectations she had prior to moving to sweden and starting this programme. she tells us she feels very lucky to be studying at university west as not everyone has the opportunity to study in higher education.
 what keeps me motivated each day is the fact that i really am proud and lucky i am for getting the opportunity to continue my education especially being able to do so at the amazing university west.
 for luigia her time here so far has been wonderful. she loves her classmates professors university staff and feels like they all are amazing people. the people at university west had really made her feel like shes in the right place to follow her dreams.
 i had the chance to attend two courses until now social science and political philosophy and i can honestly say that i have been enjoying every single lecture.
 luigia explains that in addition to the wonderful university environment and the nice people the city of trollhättan offers a good student life with lots of activities.
 when i am not studying i spend time at the gym i read some books at the universitys library or take small trips around to get to know sweden better.
 when she is asked about the future she tells us that she has big plans and is 100 sure the studies at university west can help her reach her goals.
 my time here is shaping my mind and personality helping me to evolve into a better individual thanks to the education that i am receiving. my dreams for the future are big. but as for now i just would like to focus on my academic studies.
 mhealth intervention for distribution of health information to rural and economically disadvantaged communities
 access to reliable health information remains a challenge in low and middle income countries lmic particularly in rural areas. there is a need to identify strategies to distribute vital health information to patients and to communities.
 the proposed project will be set in 5 primary health care phc clinics in the rural or tambo district eastern cape south africa where governmental healthcare staff tend to be overburdened and have little time for health promotion and education.
 almost all households have access to smart phones. we therefore propose a strategy using internet or serverbased digital knowledge hubs at facilities and allowing anyone attending phc clinics to download health educational material onto phones. reliable information about their illnesses would then be available to patients and their families to watch at home. patientspecific information would be bundled with general health information which will be of broader benefit to households and communities.
 the idea is to introduce students to machine elements including product development machine design.
 this is done in lecture form where an orientation and description is given for the basic conditions for achieving a functioning machine.
 in addition there is a practical exercise that involves dismantling and analyzing a machine and reassembling it listing which machine elements the machine is built of and answering how the designer has thought in terms of economy environment destruction quality etc.
 the following points are addressed in the course
 product planning
 analytical methods
 functional ability
 form and forcedependent function
 design criteria including sustainability environmental aspects economy
 tribology friction abrasion lubrication
 tolerances and fits
 screws and screw joints
 press and shrink fits
 keyed connection
 welded joints
 shafts shaft couplings seals
 machine dynamics
 static and dynamic balancing
 start of machines
 gears
 helical gears
 planetary gear
 clutches
 ric100technical drawing and introduction to cad or
 this course aims to enhance the competence of students in use of mathematical models and computational tools in analysis of machine elements. the main content of the course is theories and calculation models to be able to dimension and assemble machine elements.
 examples of machine elements and subjects for calculation
 screw connection
 machine learning for industry 4.0
 this course provides knowledge about basics of machine learning ml and data describes ml algorithms and tools and also explains the concept of industry 4.0 and digitalization in industry 4.0.
 the emergence of artificial intelligence has created a new opportunity to apply machine learning ml in industry 4.0.
 in this era of the internet of things and big data processing of a large amount of data would not be possible without ml. thus ml made industrial production smarter than ever before. so learn the course machine learning for industry 40 to bring in new business models in your company and boost productivity using ml.
 the course provides knowledge about basics of ml and data describes ml algorithms and tools and also explains the concept of industry 4.0 and digitalization in industry 4.0.the individual processes can be better understood and optimized with the help of the knowledge from the course.
 also it could have an important contribution in analysing the industrial data set improving results and making decision andor predictions for failure demand sales and production.
 the basic eligibility for this course is a bachelor degree in technology 180 hp. candidates with relevant work experience are also invited to apply. two years of relevant work experience is considered equivalent to one year of university studies at the bachelor level.
 introduction to machine learning
 industry digitalisation  aspects of industry 4.0
 applied machine learning
 ahil wp 1 machine learning
 upon looking into possible cases together with the partner companies it was decided that the relevant candidate for a first machine learning proof of concept poc implementation consisted of building a ml solution for a preemptive quality control of computer numerical control cnc manufactured parts. the cncequipment was already fitted with thousands of interesting measuring points sensors and industrial internet of things iot connectivity capabilities.
 the course is about building and creating an understanding for how 3d based vision systems work connected to different robot systems. the course includes 3d vision such as stereo vision and camera calibration as well as visionbased robot control.
 degree of bachelor of science in computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering or industrial engineering and management. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 he credits in programming.
 rbs720robotic systems and
 rbk600robot certificate or the equivalent.
 machining parttime campus skb603
 the course covers cutting processing from a production planing perspective. this means moving from a factory perspective down to the individual machining process. knowledge from previous courses such as material science mechanics and solid mechanic theory is used in production planing. the course is applicationoriented in its structure with many examples from industry. the topics covered in the course are
 machine tools structure and factory layout. the structure of motion axes measurement systems and configurations that influence the choice of machine tools including purchasing aspects.
 the material properties of the workpiece and the effect of machining on the material properties.
 the chip formation process and mechanistic modeling of cutting forces and the behavior of the work material during machining.
 selection of cutting tools and their wear mechanisms linked to production economics.
 dynamic behaviour limitations of cutting tool workpiece and machine tool
 production planing methodology.
 degree of bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering industrial engineering materials science and engineering or equivalent. the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a at least 7.5 he credits of materials science and at least 15 credits of mathematics. in addition verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english b english 6 in the swedish uppersecondary level or equivalent.
 forced or selfexcited vibrations during machining are major causes affecting surface finish and dimensional precision of machined parts as well as tool wear and component breakdowns.
 one critical scientific approach to achieve major reduction or elimination of machining vibration is to fully understand the structure dynamics in particular the modal parameters of the machining system so that optimal machining conditions can be selected or controlled to eliminate the adverse effects of vibration. however during machining these modal parameters could change substantially due to the geometry force and temperature conditions.
 in this project we propose to investigate a new inprocess structural identification technology instead of standard offline use of impact hammers or shakers so that everchanging structural modal parameters can be identified in real time. the proposed technology utilizes commonly available sensors combined with analytic models based on an innovative structural identification paradigm denoted as iterative outputonly identification iooi. the iooi method is based on the analytical models of machining that have established the sensitivity of the vibration parameters to the cutting parameters such as spindle speed width and depth of cut and modal parameters such as damping ratio and the natural frequency of the critical vibration modes of the structure.
 this creates a system of equations where unknown parameter such as vibration frequencies and damping ratios could be found considering the laws that govern their relationship to the known parameters mainly spindle speed and depth and width of cut and measured parameters in particular vibration frequencies. since the precision of the identified parameters such as natural frequencies are extremely important for finding of robust conditions for machining an iterative approach would be used to improve the precision of calculation of unknown parameters in each iteration step.
 this iooi method will first be applied to machining setups with a single dominant mode of vibration in full engagement milling where the relationship between the vibration frequencies and the natural frequencies are well studied. the study will in addition establish the relationship between vibration frequencies in more challenging setups of low immersion milling milling with small width of cut to tool diameter ratio and setups with multiple modes of vibration affecting the dynamics of machining in different cutting conditions particularly when the modes have close natural frequencies.
 why if people want to work do they sometimes find themselves unemployed? why do economies experience inflation and doest it mater if they do? why do exchange rates change and what will be the impact of such changes on imports and exports? why do economies grow over the longer term and why do they fluctuate in the short term and what governments can do to prevent these fluctuations. how economies can sustain faster economics growth? studying ways to answer these and other related questions is at the heart of this course. this macroeconomics course sheds also the light on what is happening around the world from the great depression in the 1930s to the japanese economic slump that started in the early 1990s to the large u.s. current account deficit and to the financial crises of 2008.
 macro theory fulltime campus mat200
 this intermediate macroeconomics course offers a comprehensive coverage of a broad spectrum of macroeconomic issues and ideas including longterm economic growth business cycle and international macroeconomic issues. it integrates the insights of keynesian classical theories and the new classical theories of the last two decades. economists sometimes get caught up in the elegance of formal models and forget that the ultimate test of a model or theory is its practical relevance. for this reason a large portion of this course is dedicated to showing how the theory could be applied to real events by providing students with
 applications showing students how they can use theory to understand an important episode or issue.
 a numerous case studies that use macroeconomic theory to shed light on realworld data or events.
 techniques of how to use macroeconomic data to test the different models.
 a growing field for innovators
 do you have an innovative mindset? get into the field of artificial intelligence ai on the ground floor ai is in the startup phase of implementation in the industry. as a graduate of this programme you will be a key player in introducing new ways to deploy ai in the industry.
 shaping the future
 this programme combines learning in production technology and computer science. this allows you to build unique expertise in both ai and automation entering the job market as an innovative engineer where you will shape new production systems and products. this combination is unavailable from most other universities.
 we built this programme for electrical engineers mechanical engineers and computer engineers to become production technology engineers with advanced skills in ai and automation. your curriculum is designed to meet the demands of the industry.
 students from around the globe come together to create a unique and international environment. your programme is fully taught in english and you will study together with students from sweden as well as international students from countries in asia europe africa and north and south america.
 advanced laboratories and access to expertis
 agentbased automation
 smart process monitoring and process control
 with the development of the internet of things and the transition to industry 4.0 many sectors now realise the importance and potential of ai and automation. ai and automation can support the increased need for flexible and highly automated production. your studies are founded on the needs of leading companies operating in this sector. the industry needs engineers like you who understand
 ai and machine learning
 distributed systems
 on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or for further phd studies. this degree qualifies you to hold positions such as
 phd student in production technology
 project manager for design and development of new automation solutions
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the broader fields of production technology. after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at university west or at other universities.
 students are more on the same level with the professors
 the decision to pursue a masters degree is often accompanied by the question of where to study. till johannes evers a student from hamburg germany found himself drawn to sweden and to the masters in ai and automation at university west.
 i see great opportunities in ai and automation.
 are you looking for a challenging and rewarding career  with huge growth potential? with cybercrime causing trillions of us dollars in damages each year cybersecurity experts are in high demand. help protect the critical assets of an organisation. this oneyear englishtaught programme has a broad scope and is aligned with the national institute of standards and technology nist framework. it covers advanced topics related to cybersecurity standards and regulations cyber physical systems cpss security risk assessment and management cyber forensics network and cloud security and penetration testing. youll gain handson skills with many chances to connect with the cybersecurity industry. additionally youll receive complementary training to obtain your ccna cybersecurity cyberops certification.
 top programme in cybersecurity
 in the era of cyberphysical systems cps and internet of things iot digital dependency can certainly provide great value in all aspects of our life but it also increases vulnerabilities to cyber intrusion across every segment of our society corporations universities government private organizations and the homes of individual citizens. iot networks including machinery cars phones homes and social media platforms are amplifying the potential cyberattack surface. it is estimated that there are already over 21 billion iot devices worldwide and their number will double by 2025. a cybersecurity attack on an industrial application for example can expand rapidly and put an entire facility at risk. the consequences for operations people and equipment can be devastating.
 cybersecurity specialists are needed in nearly every area to help close the cybersecurity skills gap and to assist companies governments and organizations in remaining on top of cyber risk prevention and management.
 your program offers a range of benefits not available in comparable programs
 broadest available training in a full range of cybersecurity areas such as cyberphysical systems security cyber risk assessment penetration testing digital forensics and cloud security
 multidisciplinary collaboration with robotics and automation and the division of law economics statistics and politics at university west
 balance of theoretical knowledge with handson experience in the industry
 program content aligned with key international standards such as the nist and nice cybersecurity frameworks and top cybersecurity skills
 optional participation in courses offering complimentary training for additional certifications such as ccna cybersecurity cyberops certification
 students from around the globe come together in your program to create a unique and international environment. the program is fully taught in english and you will study together with students from sweden as well as international students from countries in asia europe africa and north and south america.
 university west is swedens leading university when it comes to workintegrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continues to lead the field today. wil allows you to focus on problembased learning for industry with real projects from partner companies.
 your specialization in cybersecurity has been built in close collaboration with industry and is founded on the pressing needs of governments and leading companies. your instructors also have a wealth of industry experience.
 industry professionals will help introduce you to the latest best practices within the cybersecurity landscape. through guest lectures company visits and companyproposed topics for degree projects youll gain handson experience in designing complete security solutions based on reallife case studies. here you can discuss your understanding raise questions and propose ideas to experts in the field  and to potential employers.
 advanced laboratories and acess to expertis
 as a cybersecurity specialist you will have access to advanced labs and equipment.
 cisco networking lab
 professional networking equipment in terms of switches routers cabling and server racks
 firewalls to isolate networks for cybersecurity experiments
 a virtualization and vmware lab
 for cloud security experiments targeting virtual machines containers and microservices
 equipment for experiments around cyberphysical systems security
 the industry demand for professionals in cybersecurity has never been higher
 worldwide cybersecurity personnel shortage of 3.12 million by 2021 the international information system security certification consortium
 worldwide growth of 350 in open cybersecurity positions from 2014 to 2021 forbes and cybersecurity ventures
 countries like australia france germany israel japan mexico the uk and the us are reporting a severe shortage of cybersecurity skills and education mcafee and center for strategic and international studies
 sweden will witness a 100 increase in the cybersecurity job market demand compared to 2017 the swedish council for higher education
 the us is on pace to hit a halfmillion or more unfilled cybersecurity positions by 2021 cybersecurity ventures
 this program helps you build a strong foundation in cybersecurity and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your ph.d. in the broader field of computer science with focus areas such as cybersecurity cyber law network security and more.
 after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a ph.d. student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad.
 its a topic that is very current and all companies know about it
 one of the best schools in the field of cybersecurity.
 combitech unit manager in secure iot
 electric systems within the automotive industry are becoming more and more advanced. now you can develop the knowledge you need to work as a highly qualified designer test engineer or development engineer in the automotive industry. this specialised training offers a novel approach in relation to traditional programmes. our programme was designed in collaboration with the automotive industry to prepare you for a highdemand career in electric vehicles and electric powertrain. this is a fulltime oneyear programme with inperson labs and company visits. it is possible to study the programme both online or on campus.
 60 he master in electrical vehicle engineering1 year offers indepth knowledge of electric circuits motortopologies electric drivelines and measurement technology with the goal of preparing you for a career as a specialist in electric vehicles in the industry.
 after graduation you have indepth knowledge of electrical circuits machine topologies electric drivelines and measurement technology and will be well prepared for a career as a specialist in electric vehicles in the industry.
 you will be highly appreciated in the job market as companies look for engineers with international expertise to improve the efficiency of global operations  something that is part of this program. in your future professional role you can for example work as an electrical machine designer or test technician for hybrid components. in addition there are multinational swedishchinese companies such as nevs volvo cars volvo ab and cevt near university west. these are examples of companies looking for specialized mechanical engineers with the international competencies you gain in this program.
 workintegrated learning  wil
 we are swedens leading university when it comes to wil workintegrated learning. at university west you can work toward an academic degree and get work experience at the same time. you will attend lectures carry out practical tasks do lab work and projects. the coursework is mostly in the form of problembased learning often in conjunction with industry or case studies from industry.
 international admissions
 the program has international admissions which means that students from all over the world can apply. all instruction is in english and you study together with both swedish and foreign students. this gives you both linguistic and cultural experience.
 its a very interesting field. you can contribute to something bigger.
 engineer at scania and alumni from germany
 this is the exact program that i was looking for
 student from spain
 were looking for competencies in battery cell chemistry
 developed in response to industry demands this master in electrical engineering is crafted in collaboration with leading companies providing realworld relevance. delve into electric vehicles and power systems benefit from close interactions with industry experts and access advanced laboratories. with a strong job market demand this program equips you for a successful career in the rapidly expanding field of electrical engineering.
 courses developed in partnership with industry your training is influenced by the realworld needs of our partner companies. upon graduation you will be qualified as a highly skilled and indemand electric engineer.
 learn from company experts throughout your studies you will have opportunities to engage with and learn from company experts through guest lectures company visits and collaborative work.
 specialised skills matched to industry needs
 track 1  electrical vehicles
 electric vehicle technology
 measurement technology
 battery technology
 track 2  electrical power systems
 electrical power systems
 electrical power system stability
 energy storage technology
 specialised and personal
 university west offers an intimate campus environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. the teachertostudent ratio is higher than at most comparable programmes at other universities. while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to dedicate focus and resources to electrical engineering. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 students from around the globe come together in your programme to create a unique and international environment. the programme is fully taught in english and you will study together with students from sweden as well as international students from countries in asia europe africa and north and south america. this will enhance your cultural experience and englishlanguage proficiency.
 the job market for electrical engineers is extremely good. this programme prepares you for a career in the industry or the academy. this skillset is so sought after that we developed it as a response to industry request.
 with training in this rapidly expanding field of technology where innovation is prioritized you will have the choice between advanced studies or a career in industry both in sweden and abroad.
 in this oneyear master in electrical engineering  programme you will develop an understanding of electric vehicles or electric power systems. your programme will cover the main aspects of design testing and development within electric vehicles with electrical engineering as the foundation.
 master in electrical engineering 60 credits is a oneyear program which includes two dedicated paths
 electric power systems
 the specific path gives you a unique indepth knowledge which the industry today has an urgent need for.
 as a completed student from the master in electrical engineering 60 credits you will receive the degree
 degree of master of science 60 credits with a major in electrical engineering
 youll gain practical experience through assignments as well as group and individual projects in close collaboration with instructors with industrial experience.
 the programme ends with a degree project thesis work in the field of either electric drivelines or electrical power engineering.
 the total programme is 60 credits in accordance with the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects.
 group projects 12.5
 thesis work 30
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a degree of master of science 60 credits with a major in electrical engineering
 your programme prepares you for the current and future needs of industry where electrical engineers with specialized within electrical vehicles and electric power engineering are required.
 youll be highly sought after by multinational corporations worldwide. in addition multinational companies such as polestar and volvo cars as well as volvo ab and cevt are located near university west. these employers are looking for specialized electrical engineers with the international competencies gained in your programme.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field of electric vehicles or electric power engineering. you can go on to develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the fields such as
 measuring technology
 electric power engineering
 sfe600 5 hp
 the program provides current knowledge in finance and its analysis tools. studies in economics business administration are combined with experience from industry  to prepare you for an international highly qualified labor market.
 about the program
 the structure and content of the courses are based on the candidate body of knowledge cbok which is used by the chartered financial analyst institute cfai in the accreditation process for financial analysts. this means that the programme forms a good preparation for cfa exams and international accreditation.
 the program consists of advanced courses 45 credits and a masters thesis project 15 credits. the programme has a strong analytical focus and emphasizes the knowledge and skills needed in todays global financial environment.
 university west offers an intimate campus environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. the teachertostudent ratio is higher than at most comparable programmes at other universities and your proactive participation is a part of the programme.
 additionally all of your courses have an international focus. this is enriched by students and staff coming from all over the world with diverse cultural backgrounds. completely taught in english your programme gives you an enriching linguistic and cultural experience and prepares you for a challenging and stimulating career in an increasingly globalised world.
 university west is swedens leading university when it comes to work integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continues to lead the field today. wil provides you with opportunities to put knowledge and skills into practice through projects case studies and analyses conducted in collaboration with companies and organisations.
 the programme provides a scientific foundation that you can directly apply in professional roles such as insurance broker realtor and financial advisor. after completing the master in finance msc youll be qualified to work in a variety of sectors and branches
 industrial and financial firms
 wealth and asset managing companies such as mutualpensionhedge funds
 national and international companies
 government agencies
 ministry of finance
 the central bank
 tax authority
 social insurance agency
 central bureau of statistics
 international bodies
 local government trade and workers organisations and the media.
 running your own analytical firm or being an economic journalist.
 having completed the master in finance at university west students are qualified for admission to doctoral studies in sweden or phd programmes abroad.
 the best thing about sweden is the people the peaceful environment and the pure air
 i am so happy that i had a chance to enjoy the sweden
 corporate finance and equity valuation
 as a society we have entered an age of digitisation  the fourth industrial revolution or industry 4.0. this puts new demands on future engineers. with training central to the development of smart factories including automation industry robots and simulation technology you will be keenly sought after. this oneyear programme is taught in virtual environments distance learning and all your studies have a close link to industry.
 we live in the era of robots
 there is an ongoing digitalisation of societies all around the world and this has brought about the explosive growth in the use of robots and automation solutions a development that implicates not only industry but entire cultures. what we are witnessing is the fourth industrial revolution industry 4.0. we not only have smart robots but units with sensors and inbuilt systems that are connected to networks internet of things iot making up the foundation for smart factories. advanced simulation models digital twins and artificial intelligence ai are going to be commonplace in industries.
 the programme is offered as two different qualifications as well as in two different teaching models.
 60 he master in robotics and automation 1 year offers indepth knowledge of automation robotics digitalisation and virtual environments with the aim of preparing you for a career as an automation specialist in the industry.
 campusbased education at university west in trollhättan sweden
 webbased distance learning with two physical meetings at university west in trollhättan sweden
 campusbased education at university west in trollhättan
 upon completing this programme you will be very much sought after on the job market. your future profession will allow you to work with programming simulation and deployment of industrial robot and automation systems or as project manager for design and development of new automation solutions.
 many of the international students who graduate from our programme apply for jobs in sweden and stay on to work here.
 the programme has international admissions which means that students from all over the world can apply. all instruction is in english and you study together with both swedish and foreign students. this gives you both linguistic and cultural experience.
 after graduating from one of these masters programmes you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student. university west offers a doctoral degree programme within the field of production technology.
 as a society we have entered an age of digitisation  the fourth industrial revolution or industry 4.0. this puts new demands on future engineers. with training central to the development of smart factories including automation industry robots and simulation technology you will be keenly sought after. this oneyear programme is taught on campus in trollhättan and all your studies have a close link to industry.
 the combination of theory and handson projects suited me well.
 alumnus from india
 magister i software engineering heltid campus tasoe
 join our masters programme in software engineering and become a software engineer equipped with cuttingedge skills. the curriculum is designed to give a deep understanding of software engineering principles and youll get to tackle real industry projects gaining handson experience and industry insights from experts. with a growing job market this field offers endless possibilities for innovation and creativity.
 software engineering was established as a subject area in order to apply sound engineering principles to software development ensuring a rigorous approach and highquality software products. the software engineering methods and development principles have proven so successful that they are now being adopted by other engineering disciplines.
 upon completing our masters program in software engineering youll emerge with comprehensive expertise in the complete software development lifecycle. this encompasses essential skills like requirements engineering software processes software modeling and analysis software design and ensuring software quality through verification and validation processes.
 the program goes a step further equipping you with a deep understanding of important knowledge of algorithms how to handle complexity humancomputer interaction hci and artificial intelligence ai. with these advanced insights youll be wellprepared to excel in a rapidly evolving tech landscape capable of creating software thats not just efficient and reliable but also userfriendly and capable of harnessing the power of ai for intelligent applications.
 you will have acquired the skills needed to become a master software engineer.
 the master program in software engineering has been built in close collaboration with software companies and industry experts and is founded on the pressing needs for skilled software engineering professionals with a comprehensive understanding of modern software engineering and industry best practice.
 the software engineering field is experiencing unprecedented demand with statistics reflecting the robust job market
 the demand for software developers is projected to grow by 21 from 2020 to 2030 us bureau of labor statistics.
 over 50 of cios in the last five years have reported that lack of software engineers is making it hard for their companies to keep up with the latest technologies and is halting innovation kpmg.
 there are almost 1 million open positions for software engineering jobs in the us alone and it is rising. analyzing the software engineering shortage in forbes.
 software engineer is one of the top four indemand professions over the next 10years and the number of unfilled jobs will expand by 25 to 2031 us labor department.
 a career in software engineering is not just a job its a journey into a world of endless possibilities and intellectual challenges. it is a field that rewards innovation problemsolving and creativity making it an incredibly fulfilling choice for those with a passion for technology and programming.
 in the realm of software engineering you have the power to shape the digital future develop new applications and solve complex problems. the satisfaction of seeing a product come to life in the form of userfriendly software or cuttingedge systems is unparalleled.
 moreover the software engineering field offers a broad spectrum of opportunities. whether youre interested in web development mobile apps artificial intelligence industrial systems or distributed computing there are opportunities to explore and excel in. as a software engineer you become part of a global community of innovators collaborating on exciting projects and pushing the boundaries of whats possible.
 building the future
 the total programme consists of 60 credits in accordance with the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects. the courses focus on development and use of rigorous methods for designing constructing and quality validation and verification of effective and reliable software programs and systems. a software engineer must be knowledgeable of the entire software development lifecycle including but not limited to requirements engineering software processes software modelling and analysis software design and software quality verification and validation.
 requirements engineering 75 credits
 algorithms and complexity 7.5 credits
 software analysis and design 7.5 credits
 applied ai and ml 7.5 credits
 software quality verification and validation 7.5 credits
 humancomputer interaction 75 credits
 master of science thesis in computer science 15 credits
 practicalgroup work 30
 thesis work 25
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of computer science msc 60 credits.
 career opportunities in sweden
 a masters degree in software engineering qualifies you to excel in a variety of roles with your specific focus often determined by the nature of your degree project. potential career paths include
 software developer designing coding and maintaining software applications.
 requirements engineer gather and prioritize system requirements facilitating effective communication between teams and clients.
 quality assurance engineer testing software to identify and fix bugs and ensure it meets quality standards.
 systems engineer building and managing complex computer systems make sure they run efficiently and securely.
 devops engineer focusing on the integration of development and it operations to streamline software deployment and infrastructure management.
 data scientist analyzing and interpreting data to derive insights and build datadriven applications.
 cloud solutions architect designing and implementing cloudbased solutions often utilizing platforms like aws lambda azure functions or google firebase.
 software product manager overseeing the development of software products from requirements to deployment.
 it consultant providing expertise to organizations on technology solutions system improvements and it strategy.
 machine learning engineer building and deploying machine learning models for various applications such as recommendation systems and natural language processing.
 software development manager leading and coordinating development teams overseeing project timelines and budgets.
 entrepreneur starting your own software development company or tech startup to bring innovative ideas to market.
 software engineers are in exceptionally high demand in todays global job market with the european union eu and sweden being no exceptions. their expertise in developing and maintaining software solutions has become invaluable across industries worldwide. nearly all larger companies rely on software whether they operate in healthcare manufacturing or the software industry employ software engineers.
 thus many organizations around the globe are actively seeking these professionals to drive their digital initiatives create cuttingedge applications and enhance their competitive edge. in the trollhättan and gothenburg region where university west is located there are?promising opportunities in multinational companies?such as
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in software engineering and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in software engineering or in the broader fields of computer science and computer engineering.
 after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad.
 there is an enormous amount of software in modern vehicles and all car manufacturers are moving in that direction because it offers much greater flexibility. and its not just vehicles everything from household appliances to industrial systems is becoming increasingly softwaredriven
 senior embedded software engineer at knowit swedspot
 train to plan design develop and integrate processes systems machines and tools for production of highquality products. fully englishtaught university wests oneyear masters programme in manufacturing engineering cooperates closely with industry incorporating recent virtual methods new materials and new manufacturing processes. outstanding features include integration of real work situations and access to advanced manufacturing laboratories.
 manufacturing methods strongly affect the design quality and economy of production. in this program you learn to plan design develop and integrate processes systems machines and tools for the manufacturing of highquality products. fully englishtaught university wests oneyear masters programme in manufacturing engineering is designed in close collaboration with industry incorporating recent methods new materials and new manufacturing processes. outstanding features include the integration of real work situations and access to advanced manufacturing laboratories.
 this oneyear program is designed for students with few years of experience as engineers. there is also a twoyear master of manufacturing program which is suitable for new graduates.
 advanced laboratories simulation tools and access to experts
 as a manufacturing engineering student you will have access to our production technology centre ptc during your studies. ptc is one of the largest and most up to date manufacturing laboratories in sweden.
 welding technologies tungsten inert gas metal active gas robotised welding etc.
 worldleading thermal spraying facilities plasma and combustionbased spraying guns
 amspecific technologies powder bed fusion techniques such as electron beam melting directedenergy deposition techniques such as laser metal deposition with wire and powder as well as wirearc etc.
 advanced manufacturing process modelling and simulations tools
 mechanical testing including microhardness tensile creep and fatigue at room and high temperatures
 nondestructive testing using ultrasound xray infrared camera and eddy current etc.
 machining dynamics measurement and test equipment such as rotating and stationary dynamometers impact hammers and accelerometers.
 advanced highend cadcamcae siemens nx
 welding and additive manufacturing simufact additive simufact welding
 computational material science thermocalc dictra tcprisma
 you will be introduced to some of the above equipment during your courses and you may work with some of them directly based on the topic of your thesis.
 while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to dedicate focus and resources to a few prioritisedselected areas such as manufacturing engineering. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 university west is swedens leading university for work integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government in 2002 and continues to lead the field today. wil allows you to put your knowledge and skills into practice within realworld contexts.
 more about the programme
 this programme presents multiple crucial manufacturing technologies and their scientific bases along with related scientific developments and ongoing challenges.
 in this interdisciplinary learning environment youll build knowledge across a broad range of engineering topics. the total programme is 60 credits per the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects.
 advanced materials science 6 credits
 additive manufacturing processes 7.5 credits
 surface engineering 7.5 credits
 machining 6 credits
 academic writing 3 credits
 computer aided manufacturing 3 credits
 thermal spraying 6 credits
 welding processes 6 credits
 degree project master in manufacturing engineering 15 credits
 the second half of the spring semester is dedicated to the thesis work of 15 credits.
 to graduate from this program you have to pass all of the included courses and thesis work as described in the education plan.
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 60 credits in mechanical engineering with a specialization in manufacturing engineering.
 twoyear masters programme in manufacturing engineering
 download the programme syllabus.
 manufacturing represents a notable section of economic activities in developed countries. companies of all sizes need manufacturing engineers to handle tasks and challenges relevant to manufacturing processes. these challenges include design and development of manufacturing processes design of new manufacturing methods or improving existing methods. from this masters programme you will gain skills to enhance your career in different sectors of the manufacturing field. on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or further phd studies.
 after graduating from this masters programme you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student in sweden or elsewhere. university west offers a doctoral degree programme within the field of production technology.
 i enjoy a combination of practical and theoretical work
 alumnus from the netherlands
 glad to get the opportunity to make industry visits.
 magnetiten is located in the neighbourhood skogshöjden a pleasant and calm area with beautiful surroundings and gardens which has given it its nickname the garden city.
 its a 20 minutes bicycle ride 5 km to university west and the city centre.
 a short distance from the student apartments is a bus stop with several departures to university west the city centre and the nearby shopping centre called överby which offers a wide range of shops and retail chains.
 type of accommodation studio apartments with private kitchenette bathroomtoilet and laundry machine
 number of studios 20
 studio apartment size 22 32 and 35 m2
 furnished no
 distance to university west 5 km
 rent 4700  5100 sek per month
 included electricity heating water cable tv via com hem and broadband cable internet  100mbit
 each studio apartment has its own separate storage space
 bicycle parking under a roof just outside the studio
 some example impressions of apartments at magnetiten
 systemspecialist
 serverdrift windows linux
 cassandra klinth tove vennberg
 annie axell mathilda grennborg
 therese carlsson ida rönner
 ti6al4v alloy 718 2169 stainless steel neutron diffraction laser powder bed fusion lpbf electron beam powder bed fusion ebpbf.
 processing of highperformance materials by laserdirected energy deposition with powders
 processing of highperformance materials by electron beampowder bed fusion
 extending powder particle size distribution of laser powder bed fusion ti6al4v  investigation of single tracks and multilayer experiments
 stress relief heat treatment and mechanical properties of laser powder bed fusion built 2169 stainless steel
 tensile properties of laser powder bed fusion built jbk75 austenitic stainless steel
 tailored ductility and strength for enhanced impact toughness of laser powder fusion built alloy 718
 posttreatment of additively manufactured fecrni stainless steels by high pressure torsion  trip effect
 residual stress determination by neutron diffraction in powder bed fusionbuilt alloy 718  influence of process parameters and posttreatment
 residual lattice strain and phase distribution in ti6al4v produced by electron beam melting
 tuerdi maimaitiyili robin woracek magnus neikter mirko boin robert c. wimpory robert pederson markus strobl michael drakopoulos norbert schäfer christina bjerkén
 microstructural characterization and comparison of ti6al4v manufactured with different additive manufacturing processes
 microstructure characterisation of ti6al4v from different additive manufacturing processes
 processing of highperformance materials by laser directed energy deposition with wire
 processing of highperformancematerials by laser beampowderbed fusion
 fatigue behavior of lowtemperature hot isostatic pressed electron beam powder bed fusion manufactured ti6al4 v
 karthikeyan thalavai pandian magnus neikter f. bahbou a. ganvir thomas hansson robert pederson
 elevatedtemperature tensile properties of lowtemperature hiptreated ebmbuilt ti6al4v.
 karthikeyan thalavai pandian magnus neikter fouzi bahbou thomas hansson robert pederson
 tensile properties of 2169 austenitic stainless steel built using laser powderbed fusion
 tribological performance of ti6al4v at elevated temperatures fabricated by electron beam powder bed fusion
 fatigue crack growth of electron beam melted ti6al4v in highpressure hydrogen
 magnus neikter magnus colliander c. de andrade schwerz thomas hansson pia åkerfeldt robert pederson martalena antti
 alpha texture variations in additive manufactured ti6al4v investigated with neutron diffraction
 microstructure and defects in additive manufactured titanium  a comparison between microtomography and optical microscopy
 staff member at service  it division of mechanical engineering.
 phd in mechanicalmanufacturing engineering
 studies on surface roughness in stable and unstable endmilling
 simulationbased product development framework for cutting tool geometry design
 ashwin moris devotta tomas beno mahdi eynian
 inprocess identification of modal parameters using dimensionless relationships in milling chatter
 dynamic effects on cutting forces with highly positive versus highly negative cutting edge geometries
 sound analysis in drilling frequency and time domains
 effect of tool wear on quality in drilling of titanium alloy ti6al4v part ii  microstructure and microhardness
 influence of radial depth of cut on entry conditions and dynamics in face milling application
 selection of chatterfree milling conditions using vibration frequency measurements
 influence of cutting edge geometry on force buildup process in intermittent turning
 timedomain modeling of torsionalaxial chatter vibrations in indexable drills with low damping
 frequency domain study of vibrations above and under stability lobes in machining systems
 analytical stability prediction in five axis ballend milling
 cutter exit effects during milling of thinwalled inconel 718
 process stability strategies in milling of thinwalled inconel 718
 minimizing the negative effects of coolant channels on the torsional and torsionalaxial stiffness of drills
 predicting continuous chip to segmented chip transition in orthogonal cutting of c45e steel through damage modeling
 ashwin moris devotta p. v. sivaprasad tomas beno mahdi eynian
 experimental analysis of cutting edge effects on vibrations in end milling
 new methods for inprocess identification of modal parameters in milling
 finite element modeling and validation of chip segmentation in machining of aisi 1045 steel
 effect of tool wear on quality in drilling of titanium alloy ti6al4v part i  cutting forces burr formation surface quality and defects
 sensitivity of axis tracking errors of machine tools to tool wear in drilling
 influence of radial depth of cut on dynamics of face milling application
 time domain simulation of chatter vibrations in indexable drills
 prediction of vibration frequencies in milling using modified nyquist method
 a mechanistic approach to model cutting forces in drilling with indexable inserts
 effect of thin viscoelastic material treatments of the clamping region on dynamic stiffness of the cantilever beams
 minimization of chatter in machining by the use of mobile platform technologies
 milling strategies for thinwalled components
 analytical chatter stability of milling with rotating cutter dynamics at process damping speeds
 helwan university bachelor of commerce and business administration gothenburg university phd.
 macroeconomics corporate finance asset pricing risk management real estate finance and international finance macroeconomics international economics sustainable finance.
 longrun drivers and shortterm dynamics of swedish real house prices accepted for publication international journal of housing markets and analysis september 2017
 testing for the presence of skill in swedish mutual fund performance evidence from a bootstrap analysis. journal of economics and business 2016. the most downloaded article from journal of economics and business in the last 90 days.
 estimating the cost of equity capital of the banking sector in the eurozone. journal of applied banking and finance 56 2015
 nonlinear growth impacts of financial development in euro area. international journal of economics and finance .vol 4 no 12 2012
 the application of equity index futures in portfolio management strategies an empirical study wissenschaftlliger verlag berlin 2007 isbn 9783865732873 with  schäfer christian
 real and monetary determination of the egyptian real exchange rate  african development review volume 8 issue 2 pages 2036 december 1996
 real exchange rate determination and the adjustment process an empirical study in the cases of sweden and egypt. published gothenburg university 1994 isbn 9188514137
 reviewer for the global finance journal elsevier b.v. radarweg 29 1043 nx amsterdam the netherlands reg. no. 33156677
 reviewer of conference papers presented at the 4th conference on contemporary problems in corporate governance 68 may 2015 the faculty of management university of gdansk sopot poland
 reviewer for international journal of housing markets and analysis
 mcdowell thom pastine frank and bernanke principles of economics third european edition review of draft chapters for third edition mcgraw hill companies 2011
 impact of sustainability on financial distress in the air transport industry  the moderating effect of asiapacific
 longrun drivers and shortterm dynamics of swedish real house prices
 testing for the presence of skill in swedish mutual fund performance  evidence from a bootstrap analysis
 do size and value premia vary across industry and market conditions?  evidence from the euro area
 has the euro boosted equity markets in the euro area?
 the impact of euro on sectoral equity returns and portfolio risk
 is there a bubble in the swedish housing market?
 longrun drivers and shortterm dynamics of the swedish real house prices
 contemporary problems in corporate governance  revised papers presented at the 4th conference on contemporary problems in corporate governance 68 may 2015 the faculty of management university of gdansk sopot poland.
 estimating the cost of equity capital of the banking sector in the eurozone
 nonlinear growth impacts of financial development in euro area
 the application of equity index futures in portfolio management strategies  an empirical study
 maintenance of canvas
 maintenance of canvas will commence on 7th of march at 0005 am. this may result in several brief interruptions where canvas is inaccessible displaying the error message service unavailable. maintenance will likely be completed by 7th march at 0205 am.
 note that this may have a particular impact on courses with late submissions for example 2355 that allow submission after the deadline.
 maintenance of canvas will commence on 5th of september at 0100 am. this may result in where canvas is inaccessible displaying the error message service unavailable. maintenance will likely be completed by 5th september at 0115 am.
 maintenance of zoom hv play and kaltura on february 16th
 maintenance of zoom hv play and kaltura will commence at 600 pm on february 16th and is expected to be completed by 900 pm on february 16th. this will result in service disruptions for the affected systems.
 whistleblowing
 make an internal whistleblowing
 you can make an internal whistleblowing about misconduct and irregularities at högskolan väst in several different ways.
 one way is to go directly to a manager to the hr department or to the universitys lawyer and raise the matter.
 you can also use the whistleblowing form below which is managed by kpmg an independent party outside the university. they also manage a voicemail where you can leave a verbal whistleblowing. through the form or telephone message you can also indicate that you want to provide information in a personal meeting with kpmg
 before reporting you should read the information about what can be reported and by whom for whistleblower protection to apply.
 to get to kpmgs whistleblowing form at högskolan väst click on the link
 whistle blowing form
 you can also enter the address directly in your browser
 it is also fine to make a verbal report in a voice mailbox for the university of west that is managed by kpmg. the telephone number for it is 077140 16 31.
 making audio and video accessible
 there can be a lot to think about when it comes to making a video or  an audio production with an inclusive design according to the accessibility directive.
 to think inclusively you should plan your production well so you do not miss anything. the directive states that users who are unable to access audio or video recordings should have an opportunity to assimilate the content with the help of an alternative representation and this can be done in various ways. feel free to watch the film below
 audio and video production
 the guidelines state that video productions must be interpreted visually and by this is meant that you describe things that are important to those who cannot take part of the visual content. one way of visual interpretation is to use verbalisation where you describe content visually.
 if you produce a video it must be subtitled in the language spoken in the video. university west has purchased a machine subtitling service that is integrated on our media server hv play for this purpose. you can also subtitle audio files podcasts on hv play but another option is to offer a text document version of the podcast.
 planning is key. if you have a script that you stick to you can ensure that you do not miss anything such as a verbalisation of an image or graph you show in your presentation. in addition the presentation often becomes clearer and this makes it easier for the subtitling service to interpret the language. this means that you save time in the finishing work. if you make a podcast you can then reuse your script for a text version that you publish together with the audio file.
 how do i add subtitles to my video?
 you reach the actionsmenu by clicking the video title in hvplay. choose caption  enrich
 the next step takes you to the subtitling service where you choose the language spoken in the video. swedish is set by default. click on submit and approximately 2030 minutes later your subtitles are completed.
 the text needs to be corrected manually. check that specifik terms and words are correct. you will find the text when you return to the actionsmenu but this time click on edit.
 then click on captions.
 here you will reach the text file. click on edit captions for checking and correcting the subtitles.
 the edit tool now opens and you can edit the text. you can add and remove text lines and change the timing.
 what do i do with the audio files?
 you can also subtitle audio files in hv play. they play in the video player that shows a black image. the approach is exactly the same. in canvas you can upload the audio file directly in a course. if you already have made a script you can add the script as a text version of the audio file then the audio file does not need to be subtitled in the machine subtitling service.
 if you want a more detailed description of the procedure and what you should think about then watch the video at the top of this page.
 making documents and files accessible
 below we will take a closer look at how to create accessible documents but first think about whether you could just as easily put this information directly on a page in canvas or on a web page? it simplifies a lot for the user if you make the information available in that way. but if you are going to create a document there are some things that are important to keep in mind.
 style sheets
 use style sheets to format the text in your document heading 1 heading 2 body text etc.. remember to put the headings in hierarchical order so that heading 1 comes first and then 2 and 3 then it is easier to navigate the document for those who use screen readers.
 caption and alt text
 give pictures illustrations and graphs a caption and an alt text that briefly describes the content of the image or mark the image as decorative. alt text is a description that is read by screen readers.
 improve the readability of the information by creating a high contrast between the color of the text and the background. avoid putting text on top of a photo or pattern as it can be difficult to distinguish the text.
 if you have links in your document be sure to print out where you go if you click on the link. also avoid printing the web address in plain text as it is read out if you use a screen reader or speech synthesizer.
 use tables correctly
 do not use tables to change the layout of your document but only to communicate relationships between data. try to keep the table as simple as possible with rows and columns avoid split cells merged cells or collapsed tables. if your table becomes too complex consider whether you can divide it into several smaller tables with a heading above each table. in order for data tables to be more accessible to screen readers it is important to clearly identify column and row headings.
 give the document a descriptive title. you can change the title here.
 word on pc file  info  propertiesword on mac file  properties  summary
 it is also important that you give the document a descriptive file name that makes it easier for the reader to understand what the document contains without having to download and open the file.
 avoid 20210413.pdfaim for meeting protocol 20210413.pdf
 check accessibility
 there is a builtin accessibility check in word. go to review check accessibility. this check reviews your document and warns you if it finds parts that affect the availability of the document.
 powerpoint has an accessibility check similar to word. if you have learned to create accessible word documents you will quickly learn the same thing in powerpoint.
 learn more about accessible document  university west
 making canvas accessible
 when you publish material on the web it must be accessible which in practice means that the content must work for everyone. you should have in mind that when you design your course in canvas you should create the best conditions for as many as possible  including design. to support your work to adapt accessibility canvas information follows on what to think about and how to do it.
 make it easier for the student to navigate your course.
 unpublish the menu paths. what you can create in a module does not have to be accessible via the menu path. the course room is also experienced as cleaner.
 use headings and indentations in modules to structure the content.
 clearly state your intended reading and implementation order through the module.
 be consistent in naming modules and page names.
 rename files when uploading in module.
 tutorial on how to make canvas accessible   with english subtitles
 just like in documents style sheets should be used when creating pages in canvas. use the headings headings 2 3 4
 embed the links instead of printing them in full text. this makes it easier for a screen reader for example but also looks more aesthetically pleasing.learn more about guidelines for links in swedish
 low contrasts between text and background color make reading difficult. therefore make sure you have high contrasts and there are tools to help you control contrast.learn more about guidelines for contrast in swedish
 an image that carries information must be described with the help of an alt text. this alt text is read out with the help of a screen reader for a person who is not able to see the image. if the image is only decorative this must also be stated.
 there is a feature in the text editing tool that helps to check accessibility. note that it only checks sufficiently high contrasts and whether images have alt text. it does not check if stylesheets have been used or if links have been embedded.
 communicate primarily information in html ie. on pages in canvas for example. if you choose to upload files in modules these must be accessibilityadapted and named with the content. you can always edit the file name in the module by clicking on the three dots on the far right.
 embed videos on a page and enter a title with a title and write a short summary sentence about the video content. the recorded video material must be both subtitled and visually interpreted verbalization.
 the canvas application
 more and more students are using their canvas app to a greater extent. remember to adapt the design of the content of the course to a small screen.learn more about guidelines for  small screens in swedish.
 further reading and inspiration
 broker economists program real estate and finance
 experiences patientreported outcome health quality of life etc. transition personcentered care.
 exchange in malaysia
 malin eriksson is studying economics at university west. she spent the fall of 2022 as an exchange student at taylors university in kuala lumpur malaysia.
 she describes the trip as one of the most incredible experiences shes ever had. but it wasnt without some nerves she left sweden for a new country.id never done anything like this before so i didnt know what to expect she says. it took a few weeks before i was able to locate myself on campus and to get an idea of the group of all the other exchange students.once malin had gotten comfortable in her new environment  with studies new friends and so on  she was ready for some more new things.
 from a geographical perspective malaysia allows for an incredible number of spectacular destinations she says. i have been to four islands domestically then we also visited south korea and singapore.
 traveling has been a big part of malins time abroad. and her best memories were spent visiting south korea.
 educational and cultural differences
 of course the trip to malaysia have also included some studying. the school itself malin describes as very modern. taylors university is the number one private university in southeast asia.
 there are obvious differences in the way teaching is done here compared to the rest of europe malin describes.
 and it was not only in the classroom things varied compared to home in sweden.
 i must say that the cultural difference was bigger than expected malin says. however people are very friendly and kind and most can speak english since malaysia is an old british colony.malin says that these cultural and environmental differences were the greatest challenge during her time abroad.the fact that malaysia is so close to the equator and all that comes with that provides a striking difference from the swedish climate which i was not use to she says. and as for the cultural differences it was at first a challenge to understand and adapt to the rules norms and way to behave.
 a great opportunity for development
 when coming back to sweden malin will miss all the people she met abroad.i have met friends i will have for life she says. all the exchange students become like one big family. we have already started planning reunion trips where we will visit each others home countries.malin recommends everyone to take the opportunity to go abroad during their studies.
 an exchange semester is so much more than just studying she says.
 you will not find a better opportunity to develop yourself as a person and your english skills and to meet wonderful people. do take the opportunity to experience this incredible and unforgettable journey.
 managing additive manufacturing for professional engineers mampe
 swedish engineers need to improve their skills and knowledge in the emerging field of additive manufacturing as this is expected to change the business models product development and production processes of firms. the project develops a modularized program consisting of six digital courses 2.5 hp on the masters level for professional engineers. the technology oriented courses concern industrial production systems and additive manufacturing of plastics and metals. the business oriented courses concern business models and innovation ecosystems iterative methods for product and business development and open innovation. the courses are online based but can be complemented by lab work. the program is developed in collaboration between halmstad university west university and sveat. the program complements the current additive manufacturing course offerings in sweden.
 the course tvb100 in manufacturing technology aims to give the student an insight into the following manufacturing methods
 casting such as sand casting precision casting and die casting.
 metal forming methods such as bending deep drawing hydroforming and forging.
 machining processes such as drilling milling and turning.
 nontraditional methods such as laser and water jet cutting.
 additive manufacturing methods.
 this course provides deeper insights to several manufacturing methods. the student will develop an understanding in the physics behind additive manufacturing metal cutting thermal spray and welding technologies. the course will also provide knowledge in process planning for metal cutting and design for assembly. further the students will receive a holistic view into how different manufacturing methods are combined into a production system
 tvb100manufacturing i or the equivalent.
 manufacturing optimisation parttime campus pop700
 this course is focused on how to optimize the manufacturing processes using traditional optimization with the aim of reducing cost and improving production. these optimizations include maximizing output rate and reducing energy consumption. this course also covers various evolutionary optimization algorithms and techniques used in industry. the course consists of seminars and practical based computer lab sessions.
 rsm700robotic simulation and
 sma700simulation of automated production or the equivalent.
 in this course the most common manufacturing methods and processes are described as their historical development and advantages and limitations with respect to materials selection capabilities productivity and economics. the students are to be presented to the following overarching categories of manufacturing methods casting plastic forming metal cutting and unconventional machining methods. a part of the course is focused on process planning for machining operations. further the course also including joining processes and additive manufacturing. over all the course has a perspective on the related economic aspects of manufacturing
 managing additive manufacturing for professional engineers mampe.
 my assignments include video production and live broadcasting.
 hvplay admin
 its not for real  the tablet as palette in early childhood education
 alice for the ipad popupboken och 1800talets visuella kulturer
 understanding nursing personnels health while working in endoflife carea hermeneutical study.
 nurses as human beings in endoflife care  a tentative theory model
 unlicensed personnels experience of digital signing for medication administration in municipal healthcare
 the challenge of joining all the pieces together  nurses experience of palliative care for older people with advanced dementia living in residential aged care units
 the struggle of health care providers to reconcile as human beings in endoflife care
 assessment and decisionmaking of swedish primary care nurses in relation to the use of interpreters
 a qualitative metasynthesis from nurses perspective when dealing with ethical dilemmas and ethical problems in endoflife care
 external mirroring of inner chaos  blogging as experienced by the relatives of people with cancer
 experiences of workintegrated learning in nursing education
 ideas of caring in nursing practice
 older persons and relatives experience of coordinated care planning via a video meeting
 caring for older people  improving healthcare quality to ensure wellbeing and dignity
 followup visits to older patients after a hospital stay  nurses perspectives.
 health care providers becoming as human beings in endoflife care  a tentative theory model
 parents experiences and perspectives of a postnatal home visit by a district nurse in sweden
 reflecting on ones own death  the existential questions that nurses face in endoflife care
 community nurses experiences of ethical problems in endoflife care in the patients own home.
 since april 2014 vicechair of subcommission ixh welding of stainless steels and nickelbase alloys of the international institute of welding.
 since 2018 member of the editorial board of the journal welding in the world.
 since september 2019 member of the institutional board institutionsnämnden for the engineering department at högskolan väst.
 since july 2020 member of the technical management board of the international institute of welding.
 teaching  supervision
 as a teacher and supervisor it is essential for me to inspire the students with the desire to learn and to awake their curiosity and interest for the contents of the lectures and labs. i always do my best to catch the students attention and to get them motivated and engaged since the very first minute.
 digital media are always present in my teaching videos animations and images help me to introduce the topic and in turn allow me to catch students preconceived ideas. i am currently working towards the incorporation of virtual reality in our welding labs.
 since 2018 i am the course responsible coordinator and examiner of the welding metallurgy course svm700 in the advanced manufacturing master program.
 examiner and course responsible of the prodex course ips600 integrated project work on welding technology since 2020.
 my past teaching contributions
 in 2017 i collaborated in the mechanical engineering program with a guest lecture in the undergraduate course manufacturing course tvt200 and in the master in manufacturing engineering i contributed with lectures in the course advanced materials science avm600 and i was teacher and examiner in the advanced production technology i avp700 course.
 in 20182019 also in the master level i developed the steel and aluminum contents of the advanced materials science course amt601.
 i have been supervising master students international bachelor students and i am currently supervising 2 phd students.
 welding additive manufacturing stainless steels duplex stainless steels austenitic stainless steels.
 metal loss and corrosion attack of fecral overlay welds on evaporator tube shields of a wastefired power plant
 computational thermodynamics in ferrite content prediction of austenitic stainless steel weldments
 influence of low energy laser welding on solidification and microstructure of austenitic stainless steel welds
 community of practice  supporting teachers towards innovations
 teaching welding with a flipped classroom approach
 i work with disability study support för students and doctoral students with disabilities at school of business economics and it and department of engineering science.
 empoyees at university west kan also contact med regarding puestions about disability study support.  you can contact me at funka@hv.se. for more information look at our webbsite
 life is a journey filled with opportunities to grow evolve and embark on new adventures. having a lifelong learning mindset staying curious being open to learning new things and committing to ongoing personal development there are always opportunities to pivot and change direction. careers are not necessary linear but have twist and turns and can lead you to to unexpected placesas the great novelist george eliot once said it is never too late to be what you might have been.
 i have experience from different industry verticals startups scale ups local to global organizations specialized in change management digitalization business transformations international expansions mas. has held positions in leadership business development  hr consulting.
 msc in business administration bsc in human resources icf certified acc coach
 i work with inhouse training and support functions for teachers and administrative staff related to digital tools recordings emeetings and the learning management system canvas.
 exam invigilator
 i work as a writing supervisor at the language resource centreakademiskt språk.
 the impact of transition programs on wellbeing experiences of work environment and turnover intention among early career hospital nurses
 ethical value conflicts in healthcare and their effects on nurses health turnover intent team effectiveness and patient safety  a longitudinal questionnaire study
 ethical dilemmas faced by healthcare teachers during the covid19 pandemic
 the role of perceived organizational support for nurses ability to handle and resolve ethical value conflicts  a mixed methods study
 the value of simulationbased education in developing preparedness for acute care situations  an interview study of new graduate nurses perspectives
 ability to care in acute situations  the influence of simulationbased education on new graduate nurses
 how do healthcare unit managers promote nurses perceived organizational support and which working conditions enable them to do so?  a mixed methods approach
 newlygraduated nurses workintegrated learning  a qualitative study from an educational and occupational perspective
 professional culture information security and healthcare quality  an interview study of physicians and nurses perspectives on value conflicts in the use of electronic medical records
 clinical course content as a dynamic variable in supervision of medical students.
 mastering the professional role as a newly graduated registered nurse
 program coordinators perspectives on implementing a transition program for newly graduated nurses  a qualitative interview study
 experienced nurses motivation intention to leave and reasons for turnover  a qualitative survey study
 gaining acceptance insight and ability to act  a process evaluation of a preventive stress intervention as part of a transitiontopractice programme for newly graduated nurses
 prepared to learn but unprepared for work  a cross sectional survey study exploring the preparedness challenges and needs of newly graduated nurses entering a hospitalbased transition program
 interprofessional learning through discussions of troubled sexgender in mental health care  a case study
 paediatric oncall consultants learning within and beyond the objectives of a coherent cpd program
 managing healthcare under heavy stress  effects of the covid19 pandemic on care unit managers ability to support the nurses  a mixed methods approach.
 preconditions for nurses perceived organizational support in healthcare  a qualitative explorative study.
 combining learning for educators and participants in a paediatric cpd programme
 mastering the professional role as a new graduate
 pedagogical strategies used in clinical medical education  an observational study
 attitudes emphasizing in the clinical supervision of medical students  an ethnographic study in sweden
 activity theory as a tool for reimagining workintegrated learning  conducting contradiction analysis
 maria spante james garraway christine winberg fundiswa noffemela princess thulile duma
 the critical role of school leaders inambitious pedagogical strategies
 workshop 6  the design dice model in practice
 maria spante sylvana sofkova hashemi
 break the habit  using an active learning classroom to promote collective reflection in and on action at the workplace
 in change we trust  a study of a professional development project despite challenging times
 following the flowzooming in on configurations  shadowing teachers sociomaterial practice in motion
 struggling with leading digitalization  diverse experiences among school andpreschool principals
 learning at work through role integration in language development and digitalization processes in preschool
 trapped in contradictions  when collegiality and individuality challenges professional practice
 producing digital stories for language learning and digital competence across generations and positions of learners in municipalities
 digital creativity  learning by story driven digital production
 digital creativity  enabling learning of gender roles in society in primary school by story driven digital production
 teaching civic orientation for new residents in sweden  on competence development and knowledge sharing in a growing profession
 the story machine  transmedia games in education
 cross competence collaboration to design for inclusion
 workshop activity theory as a tool for reimagining wil  conducting contradiction analysis
 symposium  running online formative interventions towards inclusive and just societies
 structured flexibility when learning about resourcediversity on the globe  the dollar street case
 phubbing at work  mobile phone behavior in social contexts at the workplace and associations with the psychosocial work environment
 historicity in change laboratories the role of the history wall tool to understand collective concept formation and model creation
 teaching in flexible spatial and digital conditions
 diversity in agency  experiences from three change laboratories to tackle gender related grade gap in school
 producing digital stories for language learning and digital competence
 taking the pulse of the puls project  from obedient users to innovative and empowered makers
 knotworking as an analytical tool for designing elearning while targeting industry competence needs
 expansive learning and transformative agency for school professionals
 change laboratories for all schools in a swedish municipality  a systematic approach
 organizing digitalization in school  how a municipality in sweden arranged for new curriculum implementation  emphasizing digitalization
 storydriven design using mobile technologies in transmedia practice for multiliteracy development
 reaching out tuning in  on the problematic information structure hindering connection between socially engaged organizations and refugees in the municipality of trollhättan
 on the intended and unintended consequences of the enactment of digital management control systems in swedish schools
 competence development at workplace  a work integrated informal learning wiil approach
 engwall m persson c h jutengren g. 2022 the recovery after covid19 in association to respiratory function three months after discharge from hospital. eabstract. world congress rehabilitation neurorehabilitation wien. muntlig epresentation.
 recovering from covid19  a process characterised by uncertainty  a qualitative study.
 patients selfreported recovery after an environmental intervention aimed to support patients circadian rhythm in intensive care.
 back to life  is it possible to be myself again? a qualitative study with persons initially hospitalised due to covid19.
 selfassessed aspects of health 3 months after covid19 hospitalization  a swedish crosssectional study
 zimmerman nilsson mh. 2019. knowing the value of information how can we teach our students to have analytical minds? editorial global knowledge memory and communication. 69 12 78.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. lindgren m  zandén o. 2019. singing in swedish secondary schools a diverse discursive practice. finnish journal of music education. 0102 22 5969.
 zimmerman nilsson mh.  nilsson p. 2018. when content starts to matter  capturing and developing preschool student teachers pedagogical content knowledge in music. finnish journal of music education vol. 21 1 2538.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. 2017. practical and theoretical knowledge in contrast teacher educators discursive positions. australian journal of teacher education. 42 8 2942.
 holmberg k.  zimmerman mh. 2016. snacking on knowledge and feel good. challenging discourses in arts education. european journal of philosophy in the arts. 01 01 3867.
 holmberg k.  zimmerman nilsson mh. 2016. perversity of enjoyment? preschool music activities go neoliberal. teachers and teaching theory and practice. 23 5 583595 23 5 583595.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. 2014. inclusion functioning as exclusion. new students at the academy of music. teachers and teaching theory and practice 214 112.
 zimmerman nilsson mh.  ericsson c. 2012b. the silenced discourse students with intellectual disabilities at the academy of music in sweden. australian journal of teacher education. 37 9 6780.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. 2019 student mentors in didactic conversations concerning mentoring in group seminars a way to develop pedagogical content knowledge? ecer 2019 hamburg 36 september 2019.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. 2018 teaching in a digital learning platform a case study of how second language english teachers express their technological pedagogical content knowledge tpack during collegial reflections. iceri2018 spain 1214 november 2018.
 zimmerman nilsson mh  nilsson p. 2018 why using a digital platform? teacher and school leader conversations about digital devices in teaching. iceri2018 spain 1214 november 2018.
 holmberg k.  zimmerman nilsson mh. 2013. music in preschool a real fing hit song. presenterat vid konferensen och publicerat i proceedings för the 4th new zealand discourse conference engaging with discourse. aut university 24 december 2013.
 wennergren ac.  zimmerman nilsson mh. 2013. collaborative learning in teachers literature seminars. presenterat vid konferensen och publicerat för proceedings i nfpfneras 41th congress disruptions and eruptions as opportunities for transforming education reykjavik island 79 mars 2013.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. 2013. inclusion as exclusion. presenterat vid konferensen och publicerat i proceedings för nfpfneras 41th congress disruptions and eruptions as opportunities for transforming education reykjavik island 79 mars 2013.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. ericsson c 2012. the silenced discourse. presenterat vid konferensen och publicerat i proceedings för nordisco 2012 2nd nordic interdisciplinary conference on discourse and interaction linköping sweden 2123 november 2012.
 holmberg k. zimmerman nilsson mh. ericsson c.  lindgren m. 2011. arts education and discourse analysis in sweden perspectives and contexts of application. presenterat vid konferensen och publicerat i proceedings för the third new zealand discourse conference engaging with discourse. aut university 57 december 2011.
 do grownups even think?  school environment from childrens perspective
 preschool childrens efforts to communicate mathematics
 preschool childrens efforts to communicate matehmatical
 chadwick d. richards c. molin m.  strnadová i. 2023. digital inclusion and people with learning disabilities  editorial. british journal of learning disabilities 51 p. 119124.  länk till special issue
 molin m. 2020. the emerging concepts of participation and belonging in social pedagogy. papers of social pedagogy 13 1 933. doi 10.560401.3001.0014.4350.
 löfgrenmårtenson l. molin m.  sorbring s. 2018. h@ssles and hopes on the internet  what professionals have encountered in dealing with internet use and sexuality among youths with intellectual disabilities. papers of social pedagogy 81 pp 6682. doi 10.560401.3001.0011.5851
 ineland j. molin m.  sauer l. 2018. handling plurality and dealing with difficult work experiences. a comparative study of human service professionals work with individuals with intellectual disabilities. journal of policy and practice in intellectual disabilities 151 pp 3642. doi10.1111jppi.12227
 ineland j.  sauer l.  molin m. 2018. sources of job satisfaction in intellectual disability services. a comparative analysis of experiences among human service professionals in schools social services and public healthcare in sweden. journal of intellectual and developmental disabilities 434 pp 421430. doi10.310913668250.2017.1310817
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. 2017. new em@ncipatory landscapes? young people with intellectual disabilities internet use and identification processes. advances in social work vol. 18 no. 2 fall 2017 pp 645662 doi 10.1806021428
 löfgrenmårtenson l sorbring e.  molin m. 2015. t@ngled up in blue views of parents and professionals on internet use for sexual purposes among young people with intellectual disabilities. sexuality  disability vol. 33 iss. 4 pp 533544. doi 10.1007s1119501594157
 molin m. sorbring e.  löfgrenmårtenson l. 2015. parents and teachers views on internet and social media usage by pupils with intellectual disabilities. journal of intellectual disabilities vol 191 pp 2233.
 ineland j. molin m.  sauer l. 2015. discursive tensions in late modern society  on education and work for people with intellectual disabilities. european journal of social education feset no 2627 pp 118136.
 molin m.  gustavsson a. 2009. belonging and multidimensional selfexpectations  transition from upper secondary special programmes to working life for pupils with intellectual disabilities in sweden. la nouvelle revue de ladaptation et de la scolarisation vol 4. no 48. pp 255265.
 sorbring e. löfgrenmårtenson l.  molin m. 2018. relationships and the internet. internet as an arena for love sex and companionship for young people with learning disabilities. in c bates ed. sexuality and learning disabilities  a handbook. pavilion publishing and media ltd. 133142.
 molin m. 2010. intellectual disabilities and processes of belonging in the borderland between civil and welfare state arenas. in l eriksson  t winman eds. learning to fly  social pedagogy in a contemporary society. göteborg bokförlaget daidalos ab. 202223
 digital inclusion and people with learning disabilities
 darren chadwick cameron richards martin molin iva strnadová
 the emerging concepts of participation and belonging in social pedagogy
 particip@tion on internet?  young people with intellectual disabilities and identification processes on internet
 h@ssles and hopes on the internet  what professionals have encountered in dealing with internet use and sexuality among youths with intellectual disabilities
 relationships and the internet
 im a mother but im also a facilitator in her everyday life  parents voices about barriers and support for internet participation among young people with intellectual disabilities
 handling plurality and dealing with difficult work experiences  a comparative study of human service professionals work with individuals with intellectual disabilities
 sources of job satisfaction among professionals in intellectual disability services
 new emancipatory em@ncipatory landscapes?  young people with intellectual disabilities internet use and identification processes
 particip@tion on internet? participation  pupils with intellectual disabilities and identification processes on internet
 experiences of the internet sexuality and intellectual disability among parents and professionals
 tangled up in blue  views of parents and professionals on internet use for sexual purposes among young people with intellectual disabilities
 belonging and multidimensional selfexpectations  transition from upper secondary special programmes to working life for pupils with intellectual disabilities in sweden
 martin molin jessica thorn
 young people with intellectual disabilities and social media  a literature review and thematic analysis
 new em@ncipatory landscapes?  young people with intellectual disabilities internet use and identification processes
 sources of job satisfaction in intellectual disability services  a comparative analysis of experiences among human service professionals in schools social services and public health care in sweden
 handle with care  staff experiences of difficulties working with people with intellectual disabilities
 risks and opportunities in new emancipatory landscapes?  on young people with intellectual disabilities internet use and identification processes
 is the perception of risks and opportunities on the internet changing?  the voices of intellectually challenged teens parents
 parents and teachers views on internet and social media usage by pupils with intellectual disabilities
 tangled up in blue t@ngled  views of parents and professionals on internet use for sexual purposes among young people with intellectual disabilities
 discursive tensions in late modern society  on education and work for people with intellectual disabilities
 teachers and parents views on the internet and social media usage by pupils with intellectual disabilities
 intellectual disabilities and processes of belonging in the borderland between civil and welfare state arenas
 vp  head of automotive design  engineering at afry martin öman on autonomous vehicles
 martin öman is vice president and head of automotive design and engineering at afry where he works with a team of 1400 automotive engineers.
 tell us a little bit about afry.
 afry is a european leader in engineering design and advisory services with a global reach. our ambition is to accelerate the transition towards a sustainable society.
 in total we are 17000 devoted experts working with infrastructure industry energy and digitalisation creating sustainable solutions for generations to come. we are present and have offices in more than 40 countries and deliver projects in around 100 countries.my business area focuses on automotive design and engineering. at afry we have about 40 automotive clients. in addition to the big swedish truck and car manufacturers we have clients in brazil the uk the us china and vietnam.
 can you give us a broad picture of what is going on in the automotive industry?
 it is very exciting times in the automotive industry with a rapid transformation towards electrified connected autonomous and shared vehicles to enable more sustainable mobility solutions. this is really changing the traditional automotive industry market.
 the value of the automotive industry is predicted to double from 2018 to 2030 mainly driven by new mobility solutions and connectivity services. we need so many engineers  especially software engineers. the industry has proliferated and is becoming very diverse and dynamic.
 the market is in transition shifting towards software and there is a dramatic increase of stakeholders influencing automotive design and the future of mobility
 cities are very involved now as they want liveability and mobility.
 the energy industry is continuing to diversify and impact the possibilities.
 mobility providers like uber are changing the entire approach to mobility.
 technology giants impact how systems work and communicate.
 gone are the days of the simple business model of established original equipment manufacturers oems and suppliers. now new ecosystems are establishing themselves to deliver future mobility solutions.
 for example oems and tech giants like google collaborate around navigation and entertainment systems and the evergrande group chinas secondlargest property developer which owns eight million apartments is investing heavily in new vehicle platforms and looking for new business models combining living and mobility. we are really in a moment where mobility has many possible futures.
 is your team working on any exciting developments around autonomous vehicles?
 long term fully autonomous vehicles unsupervised could offer great benefits like a reduction in accidents arising from human error reduced cost and environmental impact of transport and liberation of the time currently committed to driving. these benefits will gradually increase as the systems for autonomy develop.
 but with complex surroundings and increasingly challenging driving conditions on the road this is no easy task. the vehicles need to be able to sense their environment and adapt their behaviour accordingly as if they were conscious living beings. so on a high level this is what many of our engineers work on but more specifically the assignments are within
 function development and functional safety
 electrical hardware
 software development
 cybersecurity big data and ai
 at afry we help our clients to develop solutions for both personal transport and freight delivery. for example for three years we have been working for a robotaxi company in the us who aims to be the first to deliver mobilityasaservice in dense urban environments. this is a very exciting project
 maryam saeedi  student from iran
 maryam saeedi came all the way from iran to study a master in leadership in digitalised organisations at univeritsy west. a programme focused on teaching the students to lead develop and organize digital change within business and industry.
 before coming to sweden maryam has worked for many years in industry in different positions.i used to be a data analyst manager before coming to sweden maryam explains. so im very aware that day by day technology develops. and if youre going to be a good leader you have to know about digitalization and digital organizations.maryam notes that due to the covid19 pandemic people now better understand the importance of digitalization. this has also had an impact on how we view good leadership.when you dont know a company  you cannot rule it and you cannot help it maryam says. in my experience its very important for a company to have good leaders to survive.
 everyone knows about sweden
 even before applying to come study in sweden maryam knew quite a lot about the country.
 i actually believe that there is almost no one that doesnt know about sweden she says. anyone who is into science knows sweden for the nobel prize. anyone who is in music knows abba. and if youre into cars you know volvo.
 and for maryam whos very interested in education it was the renowned higher education system that drew her to sweden. having studied for almost one whole semester maryam has quickly noticed the differences between the swedish and iranian way of educating. one difference being the frequent and engaging group work assignments another being the relationship between student and teachers.
 i dont look at the teachers here only as teachers i think they are leaders she explains. and this is the difference between managers and leaders  leaders are more friendly and make you feel that you are all a part of a team. this is what i feel in the classrooms.
 maryam describes the teachers as knowledgeable humble and very friendly. her experience is also that the teachers are quick to help regardless of the issue.
 it feels like they really want to help you she says. so when i study i dont feel that my teachers are my enemies. instead i feel that they really want me to learn. so i study with my whole heart.
 experiencing sweden
 sweden is a small country compared to iran. in the town where maryam grew up about 9 million people live. almost as many as in the whole of sweden.
 so trollhattän for me is very quiet. peaceful actually she explains. i really like it here.
 although trollhättan is a relatively small city in sweden  it doesnt compare to small cities in iran.
 in iran then youre talking about the small cities. they are way smaller than in sweden. so to me trollhättan is quite big.
 what is small in trollhättan though is the population. maryam describes the many trees and green areas in and around the city as an aspect of trollhättan she really likes.
 when maryam isnt studying she is learning the swedish language. not only because it comes in handy when applying for jobs but also because language is so closely connected to culture.
 i love learning new languages. i find swedish very interesting. challenging yet interesting maryam says. you dont only learn the language but you also learn so much about a new country.
 other than language studies maryam enjoys reading papers and hanging out with the new friends she has met during her time in sweden so far.
 belgiumvives university of applied scineces
 hungaryuniversity of debrecen
 netherlandsfontys university of applied sciences eindhovenhz university of applied scienceshan university of applied sciences
 polandwust wroclaw university poland
 chinananjing university of aeronautics and astronautics nuaa
 indiavit university india
 master i ai och automation heltid campus tamai
 advanced laboratories and access to experts
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the broader fields of production technology.
 after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at university west or at other universities in sweden and abroad.
 do you have an international background and an interest in the technical cultural and political aspects of building resilient global supply chains? the master in operations and supply chain management provides a holistic view that is applicable for students with diverse backgrounds. it gives you unique insights into the opportunities and challenges of information technology in the field as well as an understanding of logistics and operations management. this programme prepares you for a leadership role where you help form a bridge between industrial operations and other aspects of companies and organisations leveraging data mining and machine learning to positively impact business and support greater sustainability.
 prepare to make an impact
 this masters programme shows you how to build smart production and logistics systems that serve the needs of society and contribute to sustainable development. it is uniquely holistic giving you insights into both the technical and organisational aspects of management design planning and development of industrial operations and supply chains. youll learn how to use information technology including data mining and machine learning to help control design plan and develop competitive and sustainable production and supply chain systems. youll also gain a solid foundation across logistics and operations management preparing you to improve a businesss strategies organisations and operational work in a more sustainable way.
 academic and corporate connections
 we built your programme in close collaboration with corporate partners  and your programme can also include an optional internship. the skills youll develop make you very valuable to employers. the programme also offers a pathway to doctoral studies with a workintegrated learning approach or a focus within the area of production systems.
 preparing for the future
 this programmes holistic approach across logistics operations management and information technology means youll be ready to harness the power of data mining and machine learning to positively impact a businesss strategies organisations and operational work  and create a more sustainable world. gain insights into both the technical and organisational aspects of management design planning and development of industrial operations and supply chains.
 logistics
 information technology
 interesting electives such as supply chain resilience and emergency logistics reshoring critical success factors in information technology system development projects and more
 optional internship or studyabroad experience
 increasingly complex systems require collaboration a broad knowledge base communication innovation and effective problemsolving. gain important technical and contextual knowledge from multiple perspectives including from within the company and across the entire supply chain. youll build a holistic view of supply chain management whether your background is in business administration industrial economics engineering and more.
 this programme prepares you for a leadership role where you help form a bridge between industrial operations and other aspects of companies and organisations. youll learn how to leverage information technology as a powerful tool as well as develop a strong understanding of the business and organisational aspects of management design planning and development of industrial operations and supply chains. learn best practices using lean principles in sweden well established in manufacturing and building systems that tie together it tools knowledge and management.
 the skills you develop in this programme are highly valuable to employers source zippia.com
 reducing supply chain costs from 9 to 4 can double a corporations profits
 57 of companies believe that supply chain management gives them a competitive edge
 70 believe that supply chains are a key driver for quality customer service
 on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or for further phd studies
 logistics manager
 logistics and production coordinator
 strategic buyer
 organisationalbusiness developer
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in manufacturing engineering. after graduating from this masters programme you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student in sweden or elsewhere. university west offers a doctoral degree programme within the field of production technology.
 we need to create sustainable processes in our factories...
 vice president of operations at volvo gto and plant manager of the tuve plant
 supply chain management  sourcing och distribution
 knowledge management i supply chain management
 master i robotik och automation heltid campus tarau
 as a society we have entered an age of digitisation  the fourth industrial revolution or industry 4.0. this puts new demands on future engineers. with training central to the development of smart factories including automation industry robots and simulation technology you will be keenly sought after. this twoyear programme is taught on campus in trollhättan and all your studies have a close link to industry.
 there is an ongoing digitalisation of societies all around the world and this has brought about an explosive growth in the use of robots and automation solutions a development that implicates not only industry but entire cultures. what we are witnessing is the fourth industrial revolution industry 4.0. we not only have smart robots but units with sensors and inbuilt systems that are connected to networks internet of things iot making up the foundation for smart factories. advanced simulation models digital twins and artificial intelligence ai are going to be commonplace in industries.
 campusbased education at university west in trollhättan sweden.
 webbased distance learning with two physical meetings at university west in trollhättan sweden.
 do you have a passion for engineering and a desire to enter a rapidlygrowing field? earn a degree in production technology with a specialisation in welding technology. based on the international welding engineer iwe syllabus the programme prepares you to enter the workforce as a certified welding professional. university west has worldleading facilities relevant to welding technologies advanced materials testing and characterisation laboratory equipment. this fully englishtaught twoyear programme prepares you for a future career as a member of a welding coordination team who oversees cuttingedge welding practices in a company.
 are you passionate about making an ecological economic and social impact in your career? the masters programme is designed to educate welding professionals with the knowledge and attitudes required to promote companies technological transitions to a sustainable industrial and social environment.
 upon completion of this programme you will be prepared to join a team as an innovative engineer where you will shape new welding technologies and processes. in addition as the programme integrates knowledge from different areas of welding production in combination with the international welding engineering iwe syllabus you are also eligible for presenting at the examinations of the iwe diploma with the swedish welding commission at an extra cost to register for the iwe examinations.
 university west with its longstanding background in welding is a collaborative platform with a unique ecosystem of equipment relevant to welding technologies. we built this programme for mechanical manufacturing materials and marine engineers to become production technology engineers with advanced skills in welding technology. your curriculum is designed to meet the demands of industry.
 modern manufacturing processes
 lightweight construction of electric vehicles with friction welding evastir
 improved durability and reliability of lithiumion battery welds empire
 directed energy deposition for industrial competitiveness in additive manufacturing technologies dedicate
 weld feasibility heat treatment studies of new superalloys feast
 fusion welding processes laser welding friction stir welding fsw etc.
 gleeble welding simulator and varestraint testing
 advanced materials testing and characterisation laboratory equipment
 welding technologies are utilised across a wide range of industries. there is a growing market for welding professionals due to the evolution of advanced technologies such as increasing automation and adoption of robotic welding and embedded technologies like sensors and the internet of things.
 the global market for welding and cutting equipment is expecting annual growth of 4.7 from 2020 to 2028. additionally the american welding society predicts an anticipated need for 314000 new welding professionals by 2024. as a result welding professionals can anticipate having their choice of jobs across many industries and in many countries upon completion of their masters degree.
 it aims to contribute to the continuous development in industry
 manufacturing methods strongly affect the design quality and economy of production. in this program you learn to plan design develop and integrate processes systems machines and tools for the manufacturing of highquality products. fully englishtaught university wests twoyear masters programme in manufacturing engineering is designed in close collaboration with industry incorporating recent methods new materials and new manufacturing processes. the secondyear can include an industry placement in europe asia or south america as the basis for your thesis. outstanding features include the integration of real work situations and access to advanced manufacturing laboratories.
 manufacturing methods strongly affect the design quality and economy of production. in this program you learn to plan design develop and integrate processes systems machines and tools for the manufacturing of highquality products. fully englishtaught university wests twoyear masters programme in manufacturing engineering is designed in close collaboration with industry incorporating recent methods new materials and new manufacturing processes. the second year can include an industrial placement in europe asia or south america as the basis for your thesis. outstanding features include the integration of real work situations and access to advanced manufacturing laboratories.
 this twoyear program is designed for new graduates. there is also a oneyear master of manufacturing program which is suitable for students with few years of experience as engineers
 you will be introduced to some of the above equipmentsimulation tools during your courses and you may work with some of them based on the topic of your thesis.
 in addition you will have the option to perform your thesis work at one of our partner companies or universities abroad.
 international industry placement and study
 you can spend the second year of your studies abroad in multiple locations in europe asia or south america with a corporate and university partner.
 you will complete your industrial placement while continuing to build your theoretical knowledge at a partner university or through our online courses. you will then complete your masters thesis in collaboration with your choice of the following
 your industrial placement will include
 joint supervision from one industry andor one university expert
 degree project with scientific questions based on the needs of the company
 literature review with relevant literature provided by supervisors for a better understating of the field
 weekly seminars for discussion of project progress and experience with supervisors and classmates
 oral presentation on methods technical outcomes of data processing and conclusions of the project discussed with supervisors and classmates
 a critical response including a peerreview of a colleagues project
 the written scientific report reviewed by supervisors before final submission
 this programme presents multiple crucial manufacturing technologies and their scientific bases along with related scientific developments and ongoing challenges. master of these subjects will enable you to effectively control and monitor these processes considering the impact of processes on materials.
 the total programme is 120 credits per the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects.
 metallurgy of welding and additive manufacturing 7.5 credits
 nondestructive evaluation 4 credits
 materials characterization and testing 3.5 credits
 during the autumn you will need to take your industrial placement. the courses are optional and offered online allowing flexibility for you to take them along with your industrial placement if it was necessary.
 industrial placement in europe asia or south america 15 credits elective
 statistical process control and design of experiments 7.5 credits elective
 process simulation and modelling 7.5 credits elective
 you can also spend the autumn semester as an exchange student in one of our partner universities and gaining required credits 30 credits from your host university.
 masters thesis in mechanical engineering 30 credits in europe asia or south america
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 120 credits in mechanical engineering with a specialization in manufacturing engineering.
 oneyear masters programme in manufacturing engineering
 manufacturing represents a notable section of economic activities in developed countries. companies of all sizes need manufacturing engineers to handle tasks and challenges relevant to manufacturing processes. these challenges include design and development of manufacturing processes design of new manufacturing methods or improving existing methods. from this masters programme you will gain skills that enhance your career in different sectors of the manufacturing field. upon graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or further phd studies.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in manufacturing engineering.
 master in ai and automation 1 year
 do you have an innovative mindset? get into the field of artificial intelligence ai at the ground floor ai is in the startup phase of implementation in industry. as a graduate of this programme you will be a key player in introducing new ways to deploy ai in industry.
 during your studies you will have access to advanced laboratory equipment in our newly built automation lab comprising industrial robots mobile robots machine vison and machine learning equipment etc.
 you will complete your masters thesis project in collaboration with your choice of the following
 a multinational regional or specialised local manufacturing company
 production technology west
 your masters thesis project will include
 joint supervision from one industry expert and one university expert one supervisor if your project is within the ptw
 degree project with scientific questions based on the needs of the companycentre
 regular meetings for discussion of project progress and supervisor feedback
 critical response including a peerreview of a colleagues project
 written scientific report reviewed by supervisors before final submission
 the manufacturing industry is facing a technological shift where sustainable flexible and smart solutions are necessary to assure the competitiveness of companies. the fourth industrial revolution industry 4.0 is at the beginning of implementation within the manufacturing industry. these technologies require new competences within ai sensor technology data processing advanced automation and more.
 the market for smart manufacturing is expecting an annual growth of 12.4  from 2020 to 2025. this indicates a strong market for engineers within the field of ai automation and smart manufacturing as the development of ai solutions is key for implementing smart manufacturing.
 while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to focus on and dedicate resources to a few prioritisedselected areas such as production technology and processes. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 your programme combines learning in production technology and computer science. this allows you to build a unique expertise in both ai and automation entering the job market as an innovative engineer where you will shape new production systems and products.
 this combination is unavailable from most other universities.
 production systems
 automation and ai cloud automation and digital twins
 process control and optimal control in the manufacturing process
 sensor technology smart sensing and image analysis
 humanmachine interaction
 internet of things
 mechatronics or programming
 scientific writing
 specialised knowledge
 how to apply aibased methods in industry
 how to integrate smart sensors in production systems
 how to analyse large sets of sensor data
 how to apply flexible automation solutions
 how to implement stateoftheart automation concepts
 we built this programme for electrical engineers mechanical engineers and computer engineers to become production technology engineers with advanced skills in ai and automation. your curriculum is designed to meet the demands of industry.
 the total programme consists of 60 credits in accordance with the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects.
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science 60 he credits in production technology with specialization in ai and automation
 with the development of the internet of things and the transition to industry 4.0 many sectors now realise the importance and potential of ai and automation. ai and automation can support the increased need for flexible and highly automated production. your studies are founded on the needs of leading companies operating in this sector.
 the industry needs engineers like you who understand
 on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or for further phd studies.
 there is a great demand for engineers with production technology expertise and specialised knowledge in ai and automation. in fact your programme was built in collaboration with
 youll be highly sought after by multinational corporations worldwide.
 additionally sweden is one of the leading countries within the development of advanced technologies despite being a small country. this means there are a wealth of opportunities easily within your reach.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in ai and automation programme if you fulfil the following entry requirements.see also programme syllabus
 degree of bachelor of science in computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering or industrial engineering and management. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 he credits in programming and 15 he credits in mathematics.
 university west uses a national application system run by university admissions in sweden. it is only possible to apply during the application period which starts from midoctober. the application procedure basically consists of three steps
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 140000 per year.
 university west scholarship programme
 the university west scholarship programme is open for feepaying students admitted to specified masters programmes. the scholarship will fully or partly cover the tuition fee for the programme so not costs for travel or living expenses.
 swedish institute scholarships
 students admitted to masters programmes in sweden can apply for a scholarship to cover their tuition fee. there is a national scholarship programme administrated by the swedish institute towards specific countries.
 for more information about these scholarships visit
 type of programme
 degree of master of science 60 he credits in production technology with specialization in ai and automation
 1 years 60 credits
 oncampus possible webbased component
 lectures 20 seminars 5 practicalgroup work 30 independent work or selfstudy 20 thesis work 25
 eueea citizens are exempted from paying tuition fee
 read more about scholarships for students with citizenship in countries outside the eueea
 master in ai and automation 2 years
 the total programme consists of 120 credits in accordance with the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects.
 introduction to artificial intelligence and machine learning 7.5 credits
 programming for automation 4 credits
 mechatronics for automation 3.5 credits
 sensor technology and image analysis 7.5 credits
 big data processing and analysis 7.5 credits
 deep learning 7.5 credits
 automation systems 6 credits
 project work in artificial intelligence and automation 7.5 credits
 systems and control 75 credits
 multiagent systems 75 credits
 adaptive control 75 credits
 humanai interaction 7.5 credits
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of production technology msc 120 credits with a specialisation in ai and automation.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in ai and automation programme if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 see also programme syllabus
 bachelor of science degree in computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering industrial engineering and management or equivalent. additionally the degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 credits in programming and 15 credits in mathematics.
 master of science msc 120 credits in production technology with specialisation in ai and automation
 2 years 120 credits
 university west is swedens leading university when it comes to work integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continues to lead the field today. wil allows you to focus on problembased learning for industry with real projects from partner companies.
 your specialisation in cybersecurity has been built in close collaboration with industry and is founded on the pressing needs of governments and leading companies. your instructors also have a wealth of industry experience.
 industry professionals will help introduce you to the latest best practices within the cybersecurity landscape. through guest lectures company visits and companyproposed topics for degree projects youll gain handson experience in designing complete security solutions based on real life case studies. here you can discuss your understanding raise questions and propose ideas to experts in the field  and to potential employers.
 top programme in cybersecurityyour programme offers a range of benefits not available in comparable programmes
 broadest available training in full range of cybersecurity areas such as cyber physical systems security cyber risk assessment penetration testing digital forensics and cloud security
 balance of theoretical knowledge with handson experience in industry
 programme content aligned with key international standards such as the nist and nice cybersecurity frameworks and top cybersecurity skills
 optional participation in courses offering complementary training for additional certifications such as ccna cybersecurity cyberops certification
 a virtualisation and vmware lab
 for cloud security experiments targeting virtual machines containers and micro services
 equipment for experiments around cyber physical systems security
 while large universities have many focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to focus on and dedicate resources to a few prioritisedselected areas. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 students from around the globe come together in your programme to create a unique and international environment. the programme is fully taught in english and you will study together with students from sweden as well as international students from countries in asia europe africa and north and south america.
 rewarding career in cybersecurity
 there is no absolute security. cyberattacks happen even when good security defences are in place. cyber threats and hacking techniques are continuously evolving and the human element also comes into play in causing and handling attacks. youll never get bored.
 highly skilled cybersecurity specialists find rewarding work in staying ahead of technology innovations regulations and an everchanging risk landscape.
 the value of cyber physical systems cps and the internet of things iot is undeniable. but digital dependence also increases vulnerabilities to cyber intrusion across every segment of our society corporations universities governments private organisations and the homes of individual citizens.
 a cybersecurity attack on an industrial application for example can expand rapidly and put an entire facility at risk. the consequences for operations people and equipment can be devastating.
 iot networks including connected machinery cars phones and smart homes are amplifying the potential of cyberattacks. there are already over 21 billion iot devices worldwide and their number is expected to double by 2025 varonis.cybersecurity specialists are needed in nearly every area to help close the cybersecurity skills gap and to assist companies governments and organisations in remaining on top of cyber risk prevention and management.
 in your programme you will develop the most indemand cybersecurity skills as outlined by the isc
 penetration testing
 governance risk management and compliance
 security analysis
 risk assessment analysis and management
 cloud and network security
 in order to effectively design security solutions with an understanding of their limitations and impact on people and society you will learn how to
 identify issues in system security
 evaluate various tools used in the field
 practice operational and white hacking skills
 build and test security controls using tools of the trade
 model threats and vulnerabilities related to a given system
 make assessments regarding social and ethical aspects
 collate and investigate laws regarding privacy issues standardsregulation in cloud security network security risk assessment and certain types of tests and assessments
 enforce policy for threat detection employee awareness campaigns and response and recovery protocols
 identify internal and external threats to the operation of the cloud the network and the devices attached to it
 assess risk as well as how to manage it based on an organisations risk appetite strategy
 there is high demand for cybersecurity specialists with a bigpicture understanding of the technical aspects of cybersecurity  and complimentary competence in related areas. this is why your programme is broad and multidisciplinary. weve built your training in collaboration with industry to best prepare you for the cybersecurity workforce.
 your studies will include the main functions of cybersecurity from risk management compliance law regulations security and hacking to digital forensics. this broad scope prepares you to design strategies that integrate best security practices and solutions.
 cyberphysical systems security 75 credits
 principles of cybersecurity 7.5 credits
 aibased risk assessment and management 7.5 credits
 cloud security 7.5 credits
 ethical hacking penetration testing and it forensics 7.5 credits
 privacy law policy and compliance in cybersecurity 75 credits
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of computer science msc 60 credits with a specialisation in cybersecurity.
 there is a huge unfilled demand for experts in cybersecurity worldwide. the isc forbes and cybersecurity ventures have all forecasted a global cybersecurity personnel shortage of 3.12 million by 2021.
 in 2021 cybercrime damage is expected to reach us 6 trillion cybersecurity ventures
 attacks on iot devices increased by more than 300 in the first half of 2019 forbes
 the fbi has reported a 300 increase in cybercrimes with a 238 increase in cyberattacks against banks and a 58 increase in attacks against the healthcare industry varonis
 according to a recent report released jointly by the swedish agency for civil protection and emergency msb the swedish armed forces and the swedish police there is a large scarcity of skilled people in cyber security. we have the knowledge but not enough people.
 on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private and public sectors or for further phd studies  anywhere in the world.
 cybersecurity engineer
 cybersecurity architect
 cybersecurity consultantanalyst
 cybersecurity specialist
 forensic investigator
 you will be qualified to fulfil a range of roles on graduation depending on the focus of your degree project. examples include
 supporting startups working on browserbased productivity apps
 securing cyber physical systems connected cars or robots
 working for military outfits or financial institutions
 defensive roles like safeguarding existing physical systems devices software data and networking infrastructure against potential attacks
 offensive roles involving ethical hacking where you look for vulnerabilities and risks
 youll be highly sought after by corporations and organisations big and small  worldwide.
 additionally cybersecurity is a top priority of the eu. recent legal regulations including the eu cybersecurity act csa are advocating for the development and adoption of security requirements to assure safety for organisations critical infrastructures and consumer products. furthermore all manufacturing companies will need to comply to ensure consumer products safety data privacy etc.
 in the trollhättan and gothenburg region alone where university west is located there are promising opportunities in multinational companies such as
 as these companies increase their development of connected and autonomous products they must hire cybersecurity experts to address potential cyber risks.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in cybersecurity and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the broader field of computer science with focus areas such as cybersecurity cyber law network security and more.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in cybersecurity programme if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 bachelor of science in computer science informatics computer engineering information technology or equivalent.
 master of science msc 60 credits in computer engineering with a specialisation in cybersecurity
 1 year 60 credits
 master in electromechanical vehicle engineering distance learning
 master in electromechanical  vehicle engineering distance learning 1 year
 electromechanical systems within the automotive industry are becoming more and more advanced. now you can develop the knowledge you need to work as a highly qualified designer test engineer or development engineer in the automotive industry. this specialised training offers a novel approach in relation to traditional programmes. our programme was designed in collaboration with the automotive industry to prepare you for a highdemand career in electric vehicles and electric powertrain. this is a fulltime oneyear programme with inperson labs and company visits. it is possible to study the programme both online or on campus.
 courses developed in partnership with industry your training is influenced by the realworld needs of our partner companies. upon graduation you will be qualified as a highly skilled and indemand electromechanical vehicle engineer.
 learn from company experts throughout your studies you will have opportunities to engage with and learn from company experts through guest lectures company visits and collaborative experiments.
 specialised skills matched to industry need
 additive manufacturing
 electric and hybrid vehicle technology
 at university west your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. the teachertostudent ratio is higher than at most comparable programmes at other universities.
 the job market for electromechanical vehicle engineers is extremely good. this programme prepares you for a career in product development in the automotive industry. this skillset is so sought after that we developed it as a response to industry request. with training in this rapidly expanding field of technology where innovation is prioritised you will have the choice between advanced studies or a career in industry both in sweden and abroad.
 in this oneyear electromechanical vehicle engineering programme you will develop an understanding of electric vehicles and electric powertrain. your programme will cover the main aspects of design testing and development within electric vehicles with mechanical engineering as the foundation.
 electrical system in vehicles
 components design and function of electric and electric hybrid vehicles
 electrical storage technology
 electrical measurement technology
 by the end of your programme you will have thorough knowledge of
 automotive power electronic systems
 electric machine technology
 laws and regulations governing business in the automotive industry
 the programme ends with a degree project thesis work in the field of automotive technology 15 credits.
 basics of electrical engineering for electric vehicles 75 credits
 guidelines for safety when working on and in electric vehicles 25 credits
 electric machines for electric vehicles 75 credits
 electrical measurement for electric vehicles 5 credits
 electromagnetic compatibility 25 credits
 power electronics 5 credits
 electrical drive systems 5 credits
 storage systems in electric vehicles 5 credits
 degree project in electric vehicle technology 15 credits
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 60 credits in mechanical engineering with a specialisation in electromechanical vehicle engineering.
 syllabus for the master in electromechanical vehicle engineering.
 distance learning study online from home
 distance learning means that lectures and seminars take place in the universitys digital learning environment. communication with instructors and other students is online. you will need to be oncampus four times for examinations
 a few days in the beginning of november
 a few days in midjanuary
 a few days in midmarch
 once in the beginning of june
 get more information about distance learning
 your programme prepares you for the current and future needs of industry where mechanical engineers with specialised automotive training are required.
 componentresponsible engineer in the automotive sector
 hybrid component rig test engineer
 electric and hybrid vehicle system design engineer
 youll be highly sought after by multinational corporations worldwide. in addition multinational swedishchinese companies such as nevs and volvo cars as well as volvo ab and cevt are located near university west. these employers are looking for specialised mechanical engineers with the international competencies gained in your programme.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field of electric vehicles. you can go on to develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the fields of
 you will be considered for admission to the master in electromechanical vehicle engineering if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 see also syllabus
 bachelor of science in mechanical engineering or equivalent. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 he credits in programming and 15 he credits in mathematics.
 for the academic year 20242025 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 100000. you will pay the tuition fee per semester in two instalments.
 students with citizenship in countries outside the eueea or switzerland are required to pay tuition fees for university studies in sweden. for more information about tuition fees and exceptions you can check universityadmissions.se
 master of science msc 60 credits in mechanical engineering with a specialisation in electromechanical vehicle engineering
 online with a couple of gatherings on campus in trollhättan.
 read more about scholarship for students with citizenship in counties outside of the eueea
 master in electromechanical vehicle engineering on campus
 courses developed in partnership with industry your training is influenced by the realworld needs of our partner companies. upon graduation you will be qualified as a highly skilled and indemand lectromechanical vehicle engineer.
 the job market for electric vehicle engineers is extremely good. this programme prepares you for a career in product development in the automotive industry. this skillset is so sought after that we developed it as a response to industry request.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in electromechanical vehicle engineering if you fulfil the following entry requirements.see also syllabus.
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 140000 per year. you will pay the tuition fee per semester in two instalments
 on campus with online components
 read more about scholarships for students with citizenship in countries outside of the eueea
 master in electric engineering one year
 master in electric engineering
 developed in response to industry demands this master in electric engineering is crafted in collaboration with leading companies providing realworld relevance. delve into electric vehicles and power systems benefit from close interactions with industry experts and access advanced laboratories. with a strong job market demand this program equips you for a successful career in the rapidly expanding field of electric engineering.
 courses developed in partnership with industryyour training is influenced by the realworld needs of our partner companies. upon graduation you will be qualified as a highly skilled and indemand electric engineer.
 learn from company expertsthroughout your studies you will have opportunities to engage with and learn from company experts through guest lectures company visits and collaborative work.
 track 1  electric vehicles
 track 2  electric power systems
 electric power system stability
 while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to dedicate focus and resources to electric engineering. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 the job market for electric engineers is extremely good. this programme prepares you for a career in the industry or the academy. this skillset is so sought after that we developed it as a response to industry request.
 in this oneyear master in electric engineering  programme you will develop an understanding of electric vehicles or electric power systems. your programme will cover the main aspects of design testing and development within electric vehicles or electric power engineering with electric engineering as the foundation.
 master in electric engineering 60 credits is a oneyear program which includes two dedicated paths
 as a completed student from the master in electric engineering 60 credits you will receive the degree
 degree of master of science 60 credits with a major in electric engineering
 the programme ends with a degree project thesis work in the field of either electric drivelines or electric power engineering.
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a degree of master of science 60 credits with a major in electric engineering.
 your programme prepares you for the current and future needs of industry where electric engineers with specialized within electric vehicles and electric power engineering are required.
 youll be highly sought after by multinational corporations worldwide. in addition multinational companies such as polestar and volvo cars as well as volvo ab and cevt are located near university west. these employers are looking for specialized electric engineers with the international competencies gained in your programme.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in electric engineering if you fulfil the following entry requirements
 see also syllabus.
 bachelor of science in electric engineering or equivalent. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 3 he credits in programming and 15 he credits in mathematics.
 master in finance
 kickstart your career as a financial analyst
 the master in finance fasttracks you to a successful career as a financial analyst in sweden or abroad. we cooperate with accreditation organisations such as swedsec and the cfa society sweden and cover the knowledge necessary to work as a financial analyst.
 learn from uniquely diverse and qualified team
 international yet intimate
 university west offers an intimate campus environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. the teachertostudent ratio is higher than at most comparable programmes at other universities and your proactive participation is a part of the programme. additionally all of your courses have an international focus. this is enriched by students and staff coming from all over the world with diverse cultural backgrounds. completely taught in english your programme gives you an enriching linguistic and cultural experience and prepares you for a challenging and stimulating career in an increasingly globalised world.
 the oneyear master in finance prepares you for a career as a financial analyst in corporations and financial institutions. fully taught in english it consists of advanced courses 45 credits and a masters thesis project 15 credits. the programme has a strong analytical focus and emphasizes the knowledge and skills needed in todays global financial environment.
 practice and theory
 advanced learning techniques
 forecasting
 computer applications
 the total programme is 60 credits
 financial reporting and analysis including ethical considerations for financial profession 7.5 credits
 corporate finance and equity valuation 7.5 credits
 portfolio management and alternative investment 7.5 credits
 international finance 7.5 credits
 degree project in finance master 60 credits 15 credits
 here is an estimated average breakdown of how youll spend your time each week
 practicalgroup work 5
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 60 credits with a major in economics.
 running your own analytical firm or being an economic journalist
 further educationhaving completed the master in finance at university west students are qualified for admission to doctoral studies in sweden or phd programmes abroad.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in finance if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 see also programme syllabus.
 bachelors degree worth 180 credits with 90 credits in the major subject field of economics with at least 7.5 credits in finance at the intermediate level and 7.5 credits in econometrics statistics or the equivalent.
 alternatively a bachelors degree worth 180 credits with 90 credits in the major subject field of business administration with at least 7.5 credits in micro economics and 7.5 credits in macroeconomics and at least 7.5 credits in finance at the intermediate level and 7.5 credits in econometrics statistics or the equivalent.
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 120000. you will pay the tuition fee per semester two instalments.
 master of science msc with a major in economics
 receive the latest updates from university west straight into your mailbox.
 master in international business
 earn one year master in international business in sweden known for its socially responsible business practices. the programme offers a solid foundation in international business and train students to become international business professionals by providing them opportunities to identify and solve reallife problems faced by international companies in the global business environment using a scientific approach. on completion of this programme the students will build knowledge and skills necessary for making informed decisions in cross cultural business settings and navigating business globally. this programme is taught in english.
 dual focus on large businesses and smes
 recognising higher levels of involvement of smes small and mediumsized enterprises in international operations your courses pay equal attention to large companies operating globally and smes  whether they are making their first steps into international markets or rapidly expanding internationally.
 furthermore while studying in trollhättan which is located near the swedishnorwegian border eu external border you can expect a stronger focus on the needs and challenges of crossborder smes.
 swedish practices in ethical business
 sweden is known as a global leader in responsible business practices. every part of the programme emphasises international business ethics the socially responsible behaviour of business actors and sustainability as the dominating logic of the value creation process.
 university west offers a very personal campus environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback.
 the masters programme in international business normally enrols about 20 students. this size is optimal for effective interactions in class performing and presenting project work and individual and small group supervision as well as extracurricular activities outside the university such as teambuilding leadership development or cultural awareness exercises.
 international business at university west
 the total programme consists of 60 credits
 firm internationalization 7.5 credits
 international management 7.5 credits
 international marketing 7.5 credits
 international perspectives on management control systems 7.5 credits
 knowledge development in international firms 7.5 credits
 degree thesis project business administration master 15 credits
 educational methodswe use a studentcentred learning strategy incorporating small group discussions course projects in groups of two to five students small group tutorials lectures seminars and intensive readings and selfstudies. youll be encouraged as an active learner to both contribute to the programmes international learning environment and benefit from it. here is the approximate overall distribution of educational methods in your programme which varies week to week
 masters thesis work 25
 small group tutorials 5
 degreeupon completion of this masters programme you will receive a degree of master of science msc 60 credits with a major in business administration.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in international business if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 bachelors degree of 180 credits with 90 credits in the major subject area of business administration or equivalent.
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 120000 per year.
 master of science msc with a major in business administration
 master in it and management
 strong focus on industry needs
 choice of major
 after completing two foundational courses youll choose your preferred area of specialisation to train for your future career
 advanced software development  full stack developer
 virtual and augmented reality vrar  immersive computing
 it strategy and architecture  it management
 access to international staff
 university west offers an intimate campus environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. you benefit from a high teacherstudent ratio and will be on a firstname basis with your instructors.
 graduates from the master in it and management programme are entering a strong job market and generally find jobs quickly after graduation. its not uncommon for students to find employment before finishing the programme.
 advanced software development  full stack developer acquire specialised knowledge on all levels of software development such as servers and hosting environments relational and nonrelational databases using external apis user experience etc.
 virtual and augmented reality vrar  immersive computing learn tools and practices for creating virtual environments and immersive applications while also gaining knowledge of relevant design principles and application domains.
 it strategy and architecture  it management dive deeply into the process required for digitisation and digital transformation of a company or organisation gaining an understanding of the tools and insights needed to assist them in their transition to a digital world.
 courses that the study programme comprices
 advanced project methodology 75 he credits
 informatics influencing our lives 75 he credits
 literature review in informatics 75 he credits
 degree project in informatics master 60 credits 15 he credits
 options within the study programme
 fullstack developer 15 he credits
 immersive computing 15 he credits
 it management and digital transformation
 the master in it and management uses several educational methods. heres an estimated breakdown of how youll spend your time in the programme
 thesis work 10
 please note that percentages may differ for individual courses.
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 60 credits with a major in informatics.
 after completing the programme youll be qualified for an international career in one of a variety of different fields such as virtual and augmented media advanced software development and itarchitecture. through the various forms of work integrated learning built into your programme you will have the opportunity to gain contacts and experiences in your field making you highly employable.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in it and management if you fulfil the following entry requirements.see also programme syllabus
 bachelor of science bsc with a major in informatics information systems or the equivalent.
 master of science msc with a major in informatics
 read more information about scholarships for students with citizenship in countries outside of the eueea
 are you active curious and have a drive for change? prepare for a leading role in the transition to industry 4.0. youll learn to lead develop and organise digital change within business and industry. as a leader youll facilitate ongoing and inclusive learning and collaboration. your englishtaught programme is founded on the principals of work integrated learning. youll build handson experience in how knowledge is created disseminated and implemented sustainably in digitalised organisations.
 we built your specialisation in digitalised organisations in close collaboration with corporate partners. you may choose to apply for an internship in the third semester of your programme and your training concludes with a masters thesis you design in collaboration with your supervisor. it will address a real issue organisations now face.
 challenges in social welfare
 industrial wil iwil
 this area involves close collaboration with organisations and companies and focuses on leadership and management of digitalisation processes competence and security in humanrobot interactions sustainable services and business models and virtual environments for collaboration and learning.
 wil as an educational approach
 work in this area raises critical questions around the added value of as well as potential conflicts between university wests wil goals and the interests of our collaborating partners both within sweden and abroad.
 wil as an educational model has historically been studied with an objective to close the gap between the university and the workplace guiding universities in how to offer beneficial work placements and enhance employability.
 now different approaches that focus on how knowledge and skills are produced and learned inside and between the university and the workplace are emerging.
 international internship or study abroad
 you can chose to spend the autumn semester of the second year of your studies abroad with a corporate and university partner or stay in sweden and take our recommended elective courses.
 while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to focus on and dedicate resources to a few prioritised areas. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 digitalisation drives development at an exponential speed successful organisations need leaders who know how to implement organisational learning and flexibility. there is a high demand for leaders with these new skills in both the public and private sectors including manufacturing health care education and commerce.
 we are witnessing the fourth industrial revolution  industry 4.0. digitalisation challenges traditional organisational structures and practices. this leads to an increased and continuous need for knowledge development and new ways of thinking and working.
 how companies organise and lead their operations is changing constantly. as a result the ability to integrate digital technology and continuous knowledge development is at the centre of success.
 as a student in this programme you will build the theoretical and practical knowledge needed to be a responsible and adaptive leader in changing and sustainable digitalised organisations. you may even go on to influence new approaches to management and governance of organisations of the future.
 the programme is multidisciplinary and includes study in informatics business administration pedagogy and more. work integrated learning forms the foundation of your studies with special focus on leadership and digitalised organisations.
 addressing the challenges of industry 4.0
 this programme prepares you to lead develop and organise digital change within organisations that face a number of challenges brought about by industry 4.0.
 excessive reliance on fully automated datadriven systems puts organisations at risk of losing organisational knowledge and learning. instead judgment and human intelligence should be supported by these analytics tools for a userdriven approach. digital analysis tools should aid decisionmaking rather than lead it. you will learn how to facilitate ongoing learning and datadriven analysis of automated analytics and automated decisionmaking tools.
 quick and continuous changes require constant development of managers and employees knowledge and skills. learn how to build ongoing learning in new digital technologies working methods and organisational skills into the culture of your company.
 horizontal leadership
 digitalisation challenges traditional structures and functions requiring more horizontal collaboration within organisations. learn how to reflect on identify and fill knowledge gaps to transition established organisations into learning organizations with strategic competitive advantages.
 people must now collaborate in technologically professionally and socially complex environments requiring a more diverse equitable and inclusive leadership process. work integrated learning encourages the contributions of all in deciding how knowledge is created reflected on and shared.
 learn how to lead with an understanding of these complexities. for example how can we understand digital transformations from an equality perspective? what role does our racial or ethnic background play when we as leaders plan and implement changes in an organisation? you will learn to lead as a collaborative process with employees applying an intersectional and normcritical perspective.
 gain the knowledge and ability to reflect on and positively impact environmental social and economic issues.
 youll gain practical experience through assignments as well as group and individual projects in close collaboration with corporate and public leaders.
 the entire programme has been built on the strength of a close collaboration between industry and university west. every aspect is based on real hiring needs of companies.
 work integrated learning consists of several integrated components for instance including
 work integrated learning runs through the entire programme. you will simultaneously study and engage in activities such as data collection optional internship etc. while facing socalled complex problems that require more than one theoretical perspective to solve.
 reflection and collaborative learning with a constant interplay between theoretical modelsperspectives and practical applications structure your course.
 practicalgroup work 12.5
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a degree of master of arts 120 credits in workintegrated learning with a specialization in leadership and digitalization.
 digital transformation impacts the manufacturing process itself but also the overall management organisation and governance of businesses and organisations. thus industries and organisations are in great need of leaders to help them prepare for future changes initiated by the digital transformation of industry 4.0.
 this programme gives you the tools to develop a business or industry characterised by digitalisation. on graduation youll be able to work within and between different organisational structures to lead drive change uncover problems problematise solutions and find practical solutions.
 on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private and public sectors or for further phd studies  worldwide.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the broader fields of wil business administration and informatics.after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in leadership in digitalised organisations programme if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 bachelor degree 180 credits in any field or equivalent.
 degree of master of arts 120 credits in workintegrated learning with a specialization in leadership and digitalization
 on campus possible webbased component
 master in manufacturing engineering 1 year
 advanced laboratory and access to experts
 as a manufacturing manufacturing engineering engineering student you will have access to the our production technology centre ptc during your studies. ptc is one of the largest and newest most up to date manufacturing laboratories in sweden.
 metal additive manufacturing technologies powder bed fusion techniques such as electron beam melting directedenergy deposition techniques such as laser metal deposition with wire and powder as well as wirearc etc.
 machining dynamics measurement and test equipment rotating and stationary dynamometers impact hammers accelerometers
 you will be introduced to some of the above equipment during your courses and you may work with some of them based on the topic of your thesis.
 the production technology center
 movie about ptw west
 partnershipexchange
 while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to dedicate focus and resources to a few prioritisedselected areas such as manufacturing engineering. while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to dedicate focus and resources to manufacturing engineering. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 university west is swedens leading university forwork integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government in 2002 and continues to lead the field today. wil allows you to put your knowledge and skills into practice within realworld contexts.
 this wil approach offers you a focus on problembased learning for industry with real projects from ptw and partner companies. your training concludes with a masters thesis project in industry or academia.
 the total programme is 60 credits per the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects.
 computeraided manufacturing 3 credits
 thesis project 15 credits
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 60 credits in mechanical engineering.
 variations of the masters programme in manufacturing engineering
 master in manufacturing engineering on campus 2 years
 manufacturing represents a notable section of economic activities in developed countries. companies of all sizes need manufacturing engineers to handle tasks and challenges relevant to manufacturing processes. these challenges include planning design and development of manufacturing processes development design of new manufacturing methods or improving existing methods. from this masters programme you will gain skills to enhance your career in different sectors of the manufacturing field. on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within the private sector or further phd studies.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in manufacturing engineering if you fulfil the following entry requirements.see also programme syllabus
 bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering industrial engineering materials science and engineering or the equivalent. the degree must include at least 7.5 credits of materials science and at least 15 credits of mathematics including basic knowledge of analysis linear algebra and statistics.
 degree of master of science 60 credits with a major in mechanical engineering
 master in manufacturing engineering 2 years
 you will complete your industrial placement while continuing to build your theoretical knowledge at a partner university or through our online courses. you will then complete your masters thesis in collaboration with your choice of the following
 you may also choose to stay in sweden during your industrial placement. in sweden you can choose between working with a swedish company or within the university wests ptw.
 joint supervision from one industry and one university expert
 degree project with scientific questions based on the needs of the company
 literature review with relevant literature provided by supervisors for a better understating of the field
 weekly seminars for discussion of project progress and experience with supervisors and classmates
 oral presentation on methods technical outcomes of data processing and conclusions of the project discussed with supervisors and classmates
 a critical response including a peerreview of a colleagues project
 the written scientific report reviewed by supervisors before final submission
 welding metallurgy 7.5 credits
 nondestructive testing 4 credits
 materials characterization 3.5 credits
 during the autumn you will need to take your industrial placement. the courses are optional and offered online allowing flexibility for you to take them along with your industrial placement if it was necessary. you can also spend the autumn semester as an exchange student in one of our partner universities and gaining required credits 30 credits from your host university.
 industrial placement 15 credits
 statistical process control and doe 7.5 credits
 process simulation and modelling 7.5 credits
 thesis in manufacturing engineering
 master in manufacturing engineering on campus. 1 year
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 140000 per year. you will pay the tuition fee per semester in four instalments.
 degree of master of science 120 credits with a major in mechanical engineering
 master in operations and supply chain management
 turkish master in operations and supply chain management
 master in robotics and automation distance learning 1 year
 is swedens leading university when it comes to workintegrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continues to lead the field today.
 access to production technology centre
 intimate and international
 university west offers an intimate environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. the teachertostudent ratio is higher than at most other comparable programmes at other universities.
 students from around the globe come together in your programme to create a unique and international environment. the programme also offers opportunities for international exposure in the form of thesis work abroad at one of our partner universities or industries outside of sweden.
 the programme is fully taught in english and you will study with international and swedish students. this will enhance both your cultural experience and english language proficiency.
 there is an ongoing digitisation all around the world and this has brought about an explosive growth in the use of robots and automation solutions. this development implicates not only industry but entire cultures.
 what we are witnessing is the fourth industrial revolution industry 4.0. we not only have smart robots but units with sensors and inbuilt systems that are connected to networks internet of things iot. these technologies together with advanced simulation digital twins and artificial intelligence ai form the foundation for smart factories.
 please note that this is a fulltime programme. we recommend students not to combine their studies with a job.
 the total programme is 60 credits.
 robot modelling 6 credits
 scientific methods in robotics and automation 3 credits
 robotic simulation 6 credits
 robotic systems 6 credits
 simulation of automated production 3 credits
 degree project 21 credits
 here is an estimated breakdown of how youll spend your time
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 60 credits with a specialisation in robotics and automation.
 distance learning means that lectures and seminars take place in the universitys digital learning environment. communication with instructors and other students is online. you will need to be oncampus twice for examinations
 get more information about distance learning
 alternative options
 master in robotics and automation distance learning 2 years parttimedistance learning means that lectures and seminars take place in the universitys digital learning environment. communication with instructors and other students is online. during the first year of your studies you will need to be oncampus twice for examinations.
 upon completing this programme you will be very sought after on the job market. our graduates work for example with programming simulation and deployment of industrial robot and automation systems or as project managers for design and development of new automation solutions.
 after graduating from the masters programme in robotics and automation you will be eligible to continue studying as a phd student at university west or other universities in sweden and abroad. university west offers a doctoral degree programme within the field of production technology.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in robotics and automation if you fulfil the following entry requirements.see also programme syllabus
 bachelor of science in computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering or industrial engineering and management. additionally the degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 credits in programming and 15 credits in mathematics.
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 100000. you will pay the tuition fee per semester in two instalments.
 master of science msc 60 credits with a specialisation in robotics
 it is distance  i do prefer studying independently
 alumnus from lithuania
 master in robotics and automation on campus 1 year
 mechatronics for automation 35 credits
 master in robotics and automation distance learning 1 yeardistance learning means that lectures and seminars take place in the universitys digital learning environment. communication with instructors and other students is online. during the first year of your studies you will need to be oncampus twice for examinations.
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 140000 per year. you will pay the tuition fee per semester in two instalments.
 master in robotics and automation distance learning 2 years parttime
 as a society we have entered an age of digitisation  the fourth industrial revolution or industry 4.0. this puts new demands on future engineers. with training central to the development of smart factories including automation industry robots and simulation technology you will be keenly sought after. this twoyear programme is taught in virtual environments distance learning and all your studies have a close link to industry.
 scientific methods in robotics and automation 3 e credits
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 50000. you will pay the tuition fee per year in two instalments.
 2 years 60 credits
 read more about distance learning at university west
 master in robotics and automation on campus 2 years
 the total programme is 120 credits.
 smart sensing 6 credits
 autonomous robotics 5 credits
 design of automationsystem 5 credits
 dynamics and motion planning 6 credits
 machine vision 3 credits
 manufacturing optimisation 5 credits
 system integration 6 credits
 degree project 30 credits
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of science msc 120 credits with a specialisation in robotics and automation.
 programme syllabus for the master in robotics and automation.
 master of science msc 120 credits with a specialisation in robotics
 join our masters programme in computer science  software engineering and become a software engineer equipped with cuttingedge skills. the curriculum is designed to give a deep understanding of software engineering principles and youll get to tackle real industry projects gaining handson experience and industry insights from experts. with a growing job market this field offers endless possibilities for innovation and creativity.
 upon completing our masters program in computer science  software engineering youll emerge with comprehensive expertise in the complete software development lifecycle. this encompasses essential skills like requirements engineering software processes software modeling and analysis software design and ensuring software quality through verification and validation processes.
 the master in computer science  software engineering has been built in close collaboration with software companies and industry experts and is founded on the pressing needs for skilled software engineering professionals with a comprehensive understanding of modern software engineering and industry best practice.
 this program helps you build a strong foundation in software engineering to develop the qualifications you need to pursue your ph.d. in software engineering as well as the broader field of computer science. after graduation you will be eligible to continue studying as a ph.d. student at university west and other universities in sweden and abroad.
 while large universities have many focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to focus on and dedicate resources to a few prioritizedselected areas. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 upon completing our master in computer science  software engineering youll emerge with comprehensive expertise in the complete software development lifecycle. this encompasses essential skills like requirements engineering software processes software modeling and analysis software design and ensuring software quality through verification and validation processes.
 advanced programming 75 credits
 thus many organizations around the globe are actively seeking these professionals to drive their digital initiatives create cuttingedge applications and enhance their competitive edge. in the trollhättan and gothenburg region where university west is located there are promising opportunities in multinational companies such as
 you will be considered for admission to the master in computer science  software engineering programme if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 bachelor of science in computer science computer engineering software engineering or equivalent. additionally the bachelor of science degree must include 15 he credits in programming and 15 he credits in mathematics.
 master of science msc 60 credits in computer science
 the need for software developers is large and constant regardless of the state of the economy
 university west is swedens leading university in work integrated learning wil. we were tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continue to lead the field today. wil allows you to reflect and put your knowledge and skills into practice within realworld contexts.
 we built your programme in close collaboration with public private and nonprofit partners. the curriculum is designed for action. it will help you understand theories evaluate plans and work towards global goals for sustainable development within your areas of interest.
 additionally you may choose to apply for an internship in the third semester of your programme and your studies conclude with a masters thesis you design in collaboration with your supervisor. it will address real issues in sustainable development currently faced by an organisation or group.
 work and workplace learning
 your peers will come from a wide range of backgrounds academically professionally and culturally. in order to achieve results it is key that people such as engineers economists system developers surveyors teachers and nurses develop an ability to communicate and lead development work both within and between organisations and society.
 the collaborative and development skills you build in this programme will enable you to contribute to concrete solutions for complex sustainability issues in a wide range of sectors.
 choose an internship or study abroad in the third semester of your programme. specialised and personal university west offers an intimate campus environment without the usual barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions and hold discussions.
 while large universities have several focus areas university wests small size and high quality allow us to focus on and dedicate resources to a few prioritisedselected areas. this ensures a highquality programme as well as a warm and friendly atmosphere.
 students from around the globe come together in your programme to create a unique and international environment. the programme is fully taught in english and you will collaborate with students from sweden as well as international students.
 organisation work and leadership
 equality and justice
 democracy and diversity
 production and consumption
 build a sustainable future
 the united nations describes sustainable development as the organising principle for achieving development goals while allowing natural systems to provide natural resources and ecosystem services that support society and the economy.
 the global goals aim to balance the three dimensions of sustainable development ecological sustainability social sustainability and economic sustainability. updating and shaping knowledge and results in regard to the 17 global goals of agenda 2030 within organisations and companies is a step towards achieving sustainable development.
 the three dimensions of sustainable development
 ecological sustainability which involves the longterm use of natural resources without harming the possibilities for and survival of ecosystems
 social sustainability which is about striving for a just society where fundamental human rights are respected
 economic sustainability which enables all people to meet their basic needs in relation to the finite resources of the globe i.e. an economic development that does not have a negative impact on ecological or social sustainability
 through this programme you will learn how to be an active agent or leader in organisations or groups playing their part in evaluating and implementing sustainable development goals.
 the programme is multidisciplinary and includes study in organisational development sustainability political science law environmental philosophy and more. workintegrated learning forms the foundation of your studies with special focus on sustainable development.
 this programme will build your knowledge base in both work integrated learning and sustainable development step by step beginning with an introduction to wil and sustainability as an academic and professional subject.
 optional internship or study abroad experience
 gain real work experience with an internship or expand your cultural competencies by studying abroad during the third semester of your programme.
 masters thesis
 the last semester of your programme consists of independent work under supervision where youll deepen your knowledge and skills in a field of special interest.the total programme consists of 120 credits in accordance with the european credit transfer and accumulation system ects.
 work integrated learning runs through the entire programme. you will simultaneously study and engage in activities such as data collection optional internship etc. while facing socalled wicked problems complex problems that require more than one theoretical perspective to solve. reflection and collaborative learning with a constant interplay between theoretical modelsperspectives and practical applications structure your course.
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a degree of master of arts 120 credits in workintegrated learning with a specialization in sustainable work.
 as a graduate of this programme your skills and knowledge will be in high demand from different organisations and in various political contexts.
 you will be able to
 identify locate evaluate and prioritise sustainability problems to find creative solutions within your area of interest
 run sustainability projects challenging traditional structures and functions via longterm and horizontal thinking
 demonstrate a base knowledge of international and national laws and institutional frameworks that touch on and address sustainability issues
 facilitate knowledge sharing within and between organisations
 identify and coordinate specialist knowledge in relation to the adjustment to be carried out
 help organisations become learning organisations where employees participate in continuous knowledge and skill development around sustainability
 assist organisations develop strategies and structure to achieve sustainability goals
 understand the structure of private and public organisations and develop the ability to communicate and coordinate with various departments such as finance it hr management etc. to achieve holistic sustainability goals
 promote coworkership in technologically professionally and socially complex environments
 on graduation you will be highly competitive for positions within private public and nonprofit sectors or for further phd studies.
 this programme helps you build a strong foundation in the field and develop the qualifications you need to pursue your phd in the broader fields of wil and sustainable development.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in sustainable development programme if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek sek 120000 per year.
 degree of master of arts 120 credits in workintegrated learning with a specialization in sustainable work
 seminars 40 lectures 10 practicalgroup work 12.5 independent work or selfstudy 12.5 thesis work 25
 master in welding technology
 master in welding technology 2 years
 linkage to an internationallyknown organisation
 the programme is harmonised with the international welding engineer iwe diploma an internationally recognised welding education certified by the international institute of welding iiw through their national organisations. after passing the masters programme courses you can earn an iwe certificate by taking an oral examination with the swedish welding commission.
 high thermal inertia solar cavity receiver development thivac
 additive manufacturing of actively cooled thermal shields amacts
 powder bed fusion additive manufacturing of metals for gas turbine applications podfam
 forging the future
 welding processes and equipment
 fatigue and fracture mechanics
 additive manufacturing processes
 materials characterization and testing
 process understanding modelling and simulationsimulation and modelling
 how to conduct advanced welding processes such as resistance welding and laser welding
 how to perform quality control tasks in compliance with strict codes and standards
 how to perform different welding positions for different materials via various processes
 how to analyse metallic materials and provide knowledge on safe operations in a laboratory environment
 how to design and achieve the desired properties of a welded joint
 conventional welding processes 7.5 credits
 scientific writing 3 credits
 phase transformations in metals and alloys 3.5 credits
 advanced welding processes 4 credits
 welding metallurgy of ironbased alloys 6 credits
 quality control in welding applications 6 credits
 welding in practice 3 credits
 materials characterization  testing 3.5 credits
 welding metallurgy of advanced materials 7.5 credits
 construction and design in welding 7.5 credits
 optional course 1 7.5 credits students can select an elective course within the
 area of production technology for example robotics and automation or
 introduction to electric vehicle systems and components
 process simulation  modelling 7.5 credits
 optional courses within programme
 among the courses in the programme there are 15 credits in optional courses. you can choose from the courses below or you can take courses at another institution of higher learning either in sweden or abroad.
 process simulation and modeling 75 credits
 practicalgroup work 20
 upon completion of this masters programme you will receive a master of production technology msc 120 credits with a specialisation in welding technology.
 see the programme syllabus.
 rapid market growth in various industrial sectors that require welding applications as well as the evolution of advanced technologies in manufacturing have resulted in a growing need for skilled welding professionals. studying welding technology can support the increased need for flexible and highly automated production. your studies are founded on the needs of leading companies operating in this sector.
 advanced welding technologies
 materials characterization and nondestructive testing
 quality control engineer
 project manager for design and development of new welding solutions
 there is a great demand for engineers with production technology expertise and specialised knowledge in welding technology. in fact the programme was built in collaboration with international companies such as gkn aerospace bae  saab aeronautics uddeholm alfa laval volvo sandvik itw esab trumpf procada and permanova. youll be highly sought after by multinational corporations worldwide.
 you will be considered for admission to the master in welding technology if you fulfil the following entry requirements.see also programme syllabus
 bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering materials engineering marine engineering welding engineering or equivalent. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 15 he credits in mathematics and 75 he credits material science.
 degree of master of science 120 credits in production technology with specialization in welding technology
 the graduation ceremony at university west occurs in early summer. the ceremony  with speech and music small reception and hors doeuvres  are for all students who have studied a masters program at university west.
 the ceremony is for students who has completed a master programme at university west. if you have any questions regarding the ceremony please contact event@hv.se.
 information about our master studies.
 it and management informatics 60 ects
 master oneyear for students with a bachelor in informaticsinformation systems computer science or similar. the focus is our change in lifestyle due to use of it and information systems and how it systems best should be designed and used to support in work and other types of life situations. the courses are very much applied and working life oriented wil with examples from different activities. there is also a possibility to go on with phd studies depending on positions.
 international business 60 ects
 master oneyear for students with bachelor in management marketing or accounting or equivalent. international business comprises a large and growing portion of the worlds total business. this development requires deep knowledge and professional capability in the field of international business from those who operate in todays companies.the masters programme in international business offers you such a knowledge and capability and gives you the tools to meet such a challenge.
 masters in finance 60 ects
 master oneyear for students with bachelor in economics finance or equivalent. it is an important and growing key area for the development of the economy and business. in order to be able to contribute the needs of deeper knowledge and skills are important. this master is developed and run in close cooperation with universities in both europe and shanghai china. the masters program in finance will give you the knowledge and capability to work with complex financial issues and in an international setting.
 international politics 60 ects spring
 in the material lab it is possible to evaluate and test components and materials that have been produced in some of the other labs.
 the material lab is used primarily to test thermally sprayed and welded objects. the most important pieces of equipment in the lab are listed below.
 equipment for sample preparationprior to investigating microstructure or hardness of a component it is necessary to prepare a sample. the sample is cut out and mounted in a mounting compound for ease of handling. the surface of the sample is then prepared through grinding and polishing. in some cases etching is used to reveal certain aspects of the samples microstructure.
 microscopesthere is an upright microscope capable of magnifications from 50 times up to 1000 times. it can be used for analyzing thermally sprayed coatings and weld joints. the adhesion to the substrate of a sprayed coating can be judged as well as patterns of pores and cracks. in weld joints undesirable pores cracks and oxides can be detected.a stereo microscope for low magnification investigations is used both for prepared samples and complete components. the optics provide a 3d view.
 hardness testing equipmentindentation is used to measure hardness of objects. an indenter is pushed into the material at a specific load. the depth and size of the resulting indentation is used to calculate hardness. the lab contains two hardness testing machines one for macrohardness testing for loads over 1kg and one for microhardness testing for loads under 1 kg.
 equipment for testing mechanical propertiesmechanical properties can be evaluated using a tensile testing machine. the equipment can be configured for the following tests
 shear test
 coating adhesion test
 equipment for measuring surface roughnesssurface properties of components or samples can be evaluated with a surface profilometer. it determines the profile of a surface by dragging a stylus along it.
 materials characterization and testing parttime campus mop600
 the course includes a series of lectures that cover the theoretical background of common materials characterization and testing techniques together with practical laboratory sessions. the students will continuously work on a material characterization project and learn how to safely work in a laboratory environment.
 bachelor of science degree in materials science and engineering mechanical engineering chemical engineering manufacturing engineering production technology or equivalent. in addition at least 7.5 he credits in materials science at least 15 he credits in mathematics and english benglish 6 or equivalent are required.
 materials science and engineering parttime campus mtk200
 this course gives a broad insight to materials science basics and its connection to various manufacturing processes as well as possible applications. to select an appropriate material is an crucial task in engineering design that is for some application choosing a material having a desirable or optimum property or combination of properties. by selecting the proper material as well as manufacturing process one can reduce costs improve performance and sustainability. topics of this decision process involve deciding on the constraints of the problem and from these establishing criteria that can be used in materials selection to maximize performance. this course is suitable for undergraduates with science applied science engineering or related degrees interested to pursue with a career in the development or exploitation of materials and manufacturing or individuals with other qualifications who possess relevant experience.
 hfg100solid mechanics basic course or the equivalent.
 math help center
 as a student at university west you can visit the math help center. we provide extra help with your math questions.
 math help
 we math teachers hope to be there to
 give help to selfhelp
 if necessary refer you to the appropriate expert
 ask us specific questions related to ongoing courses
 stop by to talk about an interesting math question in general
 mondays15151700
 mathematical statistics parttime campus mas200
 the course gives an overview of on the one hand basic descriptive statistics and on the other hand basic probability theory including fundamental concepts such as pictographs line plots stemandleaf plots histograms circle graphs the addition law of probability independent events conditional probability the binomial poisson and normal distribution linear regression and pearsons correlation coefficient.
 mat220mathematics b or the equivalent.
 mathematics a parttime campus mat101
 the course gives an overview of on the one hand basic algebra and on the other hand basic single variable calculus including fundamental concepts such as algebraic equations and inequalities elementary functions real functions in one variable properties of functions limits continuity the definition of derivative as a limit differentiation rules partial derivatives of functions of several variables differentials extreme values primitive functions integrals and integration methods and applications. use of computer tools.
 mathematics b parttime campus mat220
 the course gives an overview of on the one hand basic linear algebra and on the other hand basic theory and methods for ordinary differential equations such as systems of linear equations matrices and determinants eigenvalues and eigenvectors linear mappings vector and matrix algebra complex numbers ordinary differential equations systems of differential equations. applications. use of computer tools.
 mat101mathematics a or the equivalent.
 my main areas of interest concern the study of sustainability issues. more recently i have been interested in didactic aspects of teaching about sustainable development e.g. the tension between democracy and the advocacy of sustainable development. i am also interested in the study of school organizational aspects to promote teaching about sustainable development.
 i have previously also studied for example the organization and interpretation of environmental problems by political actors and political institutions and their own responsibility for managing them the relationship between individuals environmental behavior and politics and administration at different levels but also more psychological factors of importance for peoples environmental attitudes and behavior.
 i teach broadly in courses in social science in the subject teacher education but also teach courses in educational sciences and supervise students from undergraduate level to doctoral education.
 zannakis m. molander s.  johansson l.o. 2019 on the relationship between proenvironmental behavior experienced monetary costs and psychological gains. sustainability 11 5467.
 zannakis m. 2015 the blending of discourses in swedens urge to go ahead in climate politics. international environmental agreements politics law and economics 152 pp. 217236.
 zannakis m. wallin a.  johansson l.o. 2015 political trust and perceptions of the quality of institutional arrangements how do they influence the publics acceptance of environmental rules? environmental policy and governance 25 6 pp. 424438.
 wallin a. zannakis m.  molander s. 2013 onsite sewage systems from good to bad to...? swedish experiences with institutional change and technological dependencies 1900 to 2010. sustainability 5 11 pp. 47064727.
 wallin a. zannakis m. johansson l.o.  molander s. 2013 influence of interventions and internal motivation on swedish homeowners change of onsite sewage systems. resources conservation and recycling vol. 76 july pp. 2740.
 books and book chapters
 zannakis m. 2009 climate policy as a window of opportunity. sweden and global climate change. gothenburg studies in politics 121 ph.d. dissertation.
 von borgstede c. zannakis m. lundqvist l.j. 2007 organizational culture professional norms and local implementation of national climate policy in lundqvist l.j.  biel a. eds. from kyoto to town hall. making international and national climate policy work at the local level london earthscan 2007.
 sustainable development environmental politics environmental discourses political institutions multilevel governance environmental attitudes environmental behavior school organization the didactics of the social science subjects.
 mathmot
 när setup har startat välj log in with a mathworks account
 a control framework for industrial plug amp produce
 mobile robot navigation and control  applied on patrolbot
 a userfriendly approach for applying multiagent technology in plug amp produce systems
 safety system for industrial robots to support collaboration
 avdelningschef campus support
 mechanics parttime campus mek210
 the course is a basic course in mechanics that forms the basis of many other physics and engineering. the course is divided into two separate parts statics and dynamics and it covers following areas
 equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies
 friction
 kinematic relations for particles and rigid bodies
 kinematic of particles in different coordinate systems newtons laws of motion
 energy work power and mechanical efficiency
 finite element analysis of mechanical systems
 problem solving of mechanical systems
 mechatronics for automation parttime campus mfa600
 the course deals with the basic building blocks of a mechatronics system which includes fundamentals of sensors transducers control units and actuators. the actuation mechanism is focused on electromechanical actuators. furthermore the course deals with input and output modules in the mechatronic system and system dynamics. the performance of the modeled physical system is analyzed with open and closedloop control system.
 do you have a idea about filming or live broadcasting events? we are here to help you with your project and you do not need any previous knowledge to be able to get help with producing a film or live broadcast. book a meeting with us to discuss your idea
 book or contact
 for other assignments contact us for an initial conversation at akademus@hv.se
 record your lecture in our studio with the help of a technician. we help you with the recording and uploading of your finished film so that you can access it in your canvas course. we can also record your lecture in the lecture hall if you wish to do so.
 produce digital course material that complements the traditional lecture. it can be pure audio files for screen recordings or interviews of teachers and guests. recordings and interviews can be done both physically on site or digitally.
 do you have parts of your course that need the support of a film to simplify the selfunderstanding phase? this can be for example films on a robot machine laboratory interview with outsiders on site in the business drawing to be visualized etc.
 digital events or live streaming
 we can help broadcast your conference or other type of live events from campus or completely online. we have all the equipment needed to be able to do an allday broadcast in zoom teams youtube or any other desired digital platform.
 podcast recordings
 we can also help with the corecording of audio podcasts in our radioquality podcast studio. you can record up to four people at the same time. the room is equipped with professional microphones and headphones.
 informationsblad moau61
 anders carlberg
 university west in trollhättan offers education collaborating with worklife in an attractive and modern study environment. we focus on the student and learning. work integrated learning wil as perspective and method permeates the work at the university and is also our profile.
 short facts about university west
 20 programs at advanced level
 unique postgraduate education in workintegrated learning wil
 86 of the students have a job 1  15 year after graduation
 our campus is centrally located in trollhättan and is built with the students needs in focus. the open surfaces make it simple for students teachers and worklife to coexist.
 we focus on the student and the learning process
 university west is a government agency
 work with us
 campus tour
 press and media information
 meet us in your country
 meet us in your country or online
 university west participates in events all over the world and also in different online activities to be able to meet you. wed love to tell you all about our university and programmes and answer your questions. heres an overview of upcoming events.
 15001900 cestswedish institute virtual fair
 study in sweden and at university west
 october 19  vietnam ho chi minh city
 november 11  india thiruvananthapuram
 education fair
 november 12  india chennai
 november 14  india new delhi
 seminar study in sweden and at university west
 november 20  asia online
 10001400 cetswedish institute virtual fair
 december 9  indian subcontinent
 12001600 cetswedish institute virtual fair
 contact study@universitywest.se for more information or if you have any questions.
 person  environment. stability and dynamics of behavior. neurodiversity. social inclusion. early interventions.
 easily engaged in   could be anything  if something is worth doing its worth doing right
 och 7. systematicscoping literature reviewsritoša a. åström f. björck e. borglund l. karlsson e. mchugh e.  nylander e. 2023. measuring childrens engagement in early childhood education and care settings a scoping literature review. educational psychology review 354 136.
 sjögren h. 2023. identity formations in archived childhood memories of nature in sweden. childhood 301 4054.
 blome h.  espvall m 2023. social work students professional preferences social work education doi 10.108002615479.2023.2216209 blomé h.  espvall m. 2021. custody transfers of children and young adults in foster care. genealogy 5 80.
 granbom i. 2016. teachers beliefs norms and values of gender equality in preschools. in s. brownhill j. warin  i. wernersson eds. men masculinities and teaching in early childhood education international perspectives on gender and care pp. 8392. abingdon routledge.
 early childhood
 cultural historical activity theory  a broad definition ecumenical. ethnography ethnomethodology transformative methods  wishful thinking currently
 hilppö j.  rajala a. 2023. childrens and youths civic projects and responsible agency. in n. hopwood  a. sannino eds. agency and transformation motives mediation and motion pp. 162182. cambridge university press. doi10.10179781009153799.008
 projects childrens projects. sleac  sleep in early childhood cultures.
 hilppö j. suorsa t.  rainio a. p. 2021. transitional activities childrens projects in finnish preprimary education. qualitative studies of exploration in childhood education cultures of play and learning in transition 163.
 lager k.  gustafssonnyckel j. 2022. meaningful leisure time in schoolage educare the value of friends and collective strategies. education in the north.
 early childhood education and care. doktorand i ail tema barn  unga.
 bodén l.  joelsson t. 2023. advancing feminist relationality in childhood studies. childhood 304 471486.
 zimmerman nilsson mh. borgström källén c.  ferm almqvist c. 2022. genderequal options for musical becomings in the future music classroom a pilot study exploring thinking outside the box. international journal of education  the arts 2315.
 berman r. 2019. children in motion everyday life across two homes. i l. murray l. mcdonnell t. hintonsmith  k. walsh red. families in motion ebbing and flowing through space and time pp. 195213. emerald publishing limited.
 gurdal s. kapetanovic s. einarsson i. boson k.  claesdotterknutsson e. 2023 august. adolescents perceptions of a relapse prevention treatment for problematic gaminga qualitative study. healthcare vol. 11 no. 17 2366.
 gurdal s.  sorbring e. 2018. childrens agency in parentchild teacherpupil and peer relationship contexts. international journal of qualitative studies on health and wellbeing 13sup1 1565239.
 beatrice svedberg scania
 hanze university of applied sciences nederländerna
 polytechnic institute of braganca portugal
 bremen university of applied sciences tyskland
 cracow university of technology polen
 university of franchecomté frankrike
 merittechnology enhanced learning at advanced level for engineers
 the overall goal of this project is to design and implement technology mediated course modules on advanced level to support workintegrated learning for employees in the manufacturing industry. the industry is continuously facing global competition and customer needs. they face challenges like high quality deliveries and technological performances with less cost which calls for advanced knowledge and learning to manage changes and longterm business goals.
 to be able to perform in everyday work and deal with problem solving at the workplace engineers can benefit from workintegrated learning supported by new digital courses online. courses that will be offered within the project will mainly be developed from industrial needs of competences within production technology. they will be offered in the form of short modules and mainly distributed online to allow employees to train in more flexible forms than before.
 the course modules provide opportunities for employees to use digital platforms and social media where they can discuss industrial problems and solutions with other participants the university tutors and other companies. the project will give access to a variety of digital resources for solving demanding calculations and simulations. the pedagogical aim is to depart from real industrial problems and learn more from a variety of knowledge sources for example theoretical content in the course problem solving through use of productions tools as well as communication with others.
 see all messages for students and visitors at university west.
 newsletter to students
 we send out newsletters students at university west with the latest information support and tips for your studies.
 new way to apply for credit transfer
 new way to apply for credit transfer at university west
 metallurgy of welding and additive manufacturing parttime campus mts600
 this course gives insights into the metallurgy of welding and additively manufactured deposits of different metal alloys widely used in the industry. the influence of the thermal cycles involved in the welding and additive manufacturing processes on the microstructure and properties of metal alloys is studied. in addition the course covers several aspects connected to welding metallurgy quality residual stresses fatigue and some initiation to computational thermodynamics to predict microstructure. it is expected that the students combine the previous knowledge acquired in the courses advanced materials science welding processes and additive manufacturing processes with the contents of this course. this course is designed and developed in cooperation with industries therefore industrial guest lecturers and study visits complement this course. the previous knowledge of the students on materials science is essential.
 adt610additive manufacturing processes and
 amt601advanced materials science or the equivalent.
 mtk200materials science and engineering or the equivalent.
 metthram  metal deposition through additive manufacturing methods
 metal deposition using additive manufacturing am methodologies can enhance components made using conventional manufacturing methods. the main attraction in using wire based of metal powder based free form am is the high build rate compared to conventional powderbased am technologies. the rate can be up to 15 times higher. it is also a technology known to work in titanium based and nickelbased alloys in the capital intensive aero engine industry. metthram aims at expanding the technology to a wider spectrum of the swedish industry and to new metal alloying systems such as steels and aluminium.
 believe it or not but economics is something that affects all people. specifically in this course dealing with the microeconomic issues studies of how households firms and public sector in a society use their resources are in focus. issues being analyzed are for example how do households and firms choose what to buy sell save and invest? how much do the households work and how much labour do the firms choose to use? how can the government by using taxes subsidies and legislation affect the economy in a desirable direction? by providing a basic understanding of the microeconomic theories the aim is that the students are able to apply these theories by themselves when different problems are analyzed.
 micromigration settlement patterns and integration for societal development
 statistics indicate that the swedish population will increase with more then a million inhabitants in the coming decade.
 most of this population increase consist of migrants. these migrants consist of a very heterogeneous group with different needs and potentials to effectively become integrated into the swedish society. current general assumptions and topdown oriented policies and solutions are obviously not suitable to support an efficient integration process.
 instead this project claims that integration processes must be formed at the local level adapted to the constrains and opportunities in the local society. in collaboration with local actors at the municipal level uddevalla and trollhättan this project therefore aims to develop a local applicable timespatial analytical model with an individual perspective that can enhance an integration process suitable for migrants different needs and opportunities.
 micro theory fulltime campus mit200
 a justified question is how a elementary course in microeconomics differ from an intermediate one like this. fact is that almost all elements in this course is already covered in the elementary course. what differ is however how the elements are presented and how deep the theoretical relationships are analyzed. lets take an example from the consumption theory. on basic level the relationship between consumer preferences how they act and demand for a commodity was presented in a general way. however in this intermediate course different kinds of preferences are studied in detail and also how they in turn explain the appearance of demand. in this profound way also other areas such as production theory and welfare analysis will be studied. this means that students get a deeper knowledge and increased understanding of how the microeconomic theories can be used in order to analyze and solve various microeconomic issues facing them.
 microsoft azure dev tools for teaching  download software
 microsoft azure dev tools for teaching   download software
 microsoft azure dev tools for teaching was formerly microsoft imagine.
 the aim is to evaluate and understand it technology and may not be used for the universitys operation or for commercial purposes. this includes latest version of windows but not microsoft office. for office software go to the page office software for private computer.
 you only have access to microsoft azure dev tools for teaching while you are an active student or staff at university west. you have the right to use the software installed after finished studies or employment but you cannot download or request new license keys.
 the university has no control of the microsoft azure dev tools for teaching site and cannot correct any errors or disturbances. in case of problems you may have to try at a later time. the university cannot take responsibility for the individual installation provide support for or take responsibility for any errors. if you utilize this free service you can use the instructions you find on the microsoft azure dev tools for teaching pages.
 when you download software the interface is similar to a web marketplace. in the download process a product key comes visible. remember that all product keys are personal. please write down the product key because you will need it during installation to confirm your eligibility for installation. if you lose the key you can retrieve it in the same place where you downloaded the software.
 to download the software click the microsoft azure dev tools for teaching at the bottom of this page. you come to microsoft azure. there is a blue sign in button a bit down on the page click on it and log in. students log in with their username followed by @student.hv.se and staff with their username followed by @hv.se. in this system we also use multifactor authentication mfa when logging in. you therefore need to activate mfa. read about mfa and how to activate it here
 after downloading an .iso or .img file you can e.g. save it on a usb stick to be able to install it on your computer.
 product key is missing or do you need a new one?
 according to the agreement with microsoft the university cannot disclose any product keys.
 if you have used a product key and need a new one you can request it through the microsoft imagine interface. you cant request product keys directly from the university. if you request a key through microsoft imagine the university system will get the necessary information needed to issue a new key.
 if you want to request a new product key follow these steps
 please log in.
 click the software button.
 now click on my software in the left menu.
 youll see a list of all the programs youve downloaded.
 find the software in the list and click on download.
 the system recognizes if you have used your product key.a if the product key is used up you will see the button request additional download. click on it and youll get to a form where you can reselect the software and you must submit some additional information. b if the product key is not used you will not see the button request additional downloads. instead you will see a product key or the text the product key is not required.
 microsoft azure dev tools for teaching
 log in and download
 about microsoft azure dev tools for teaching
 microsoft azure dev tools for teaching hette tidigare  microsoft imagine.
 om microsoft azure dev tools for teaching
 despite a crucial need for more efficient operation and sustainable production of aircraft engines additive manufacturing of large nisuperalloy engine parts enabled by laser direct energy deposition with wire ldedw is still limited due to hot cracking.to tackle this problem with focus area integrated structure materials and production technology this project aims to gain a deeper understanding of this defect formation in ldedw of nisuperalloy and develop and demonstrate a fullscale model to predict its occurrence in a part. complementary fields of expertise will be put into synergy to develop an advanced physical model for establishing a hot cracking criterion for the fullscale model. experiments will be made to perform a reliability evaluation of both the physical and fullscale models. the results will contribute to reducing costly trialanderror testing maturing ldedw opening to sustainable and robust production of highquality parts thus strengthening the competitiveness of the swedish aviation industry.the project consortium associates frontline expertise of ldedw and nisuperalloy with university west coordinator  thermofluid modeling insitu instrumentation hot cracking analysis kth  solidification and microstructure ltu  solidstate mechanics gkn aerospace swedish worldwide manufacturer of aeroengines and procada ab  swedish sme expert in process control.
 good soldier schweik in civil suit  reflections of the middle european tradition of humor in the animated films of the zagreb school
 animated documentary  documentary animation
 seriously funny animation the concealed avantgarde
 swedish animated film  100 years  animated childrens films commercials animated documentaries as well as films influenced by comics made by distinct individualists are the cornerstones this cinematic phenomenon is based on.
 throbbing desire  during the 70s and 80s a feminist animation movement grew forth with the czech creator michaela pavlátová as one of the central figures. this years animator in focus is an exuberant fountain of ideas who with humor and rich imagery portrays inequality masturbation and unhappy marriage.
 the puppetactor in virtual environment  theatrical puppetry cinema puppetry digital puppetry
 polish animation between two golden ages
 psychorealism vs the uncanny valley  chris landreth comes across as a digital animation heir to norman mclaren
 a vivid connection  comics and animation as a context for understanding the work of nedeljko dragic i kresimir zimonic
 the clayman from norway and his worlds
 representative doll on a digital scene 31st animafest  world festival of animated film 2021
 titos image in the postyugoslav essay film
 microscopic reading of a story on animation
 roundtable of the monththe image of beyond oneself  the context and development of swedish animation documentaries
 little man at the turn of the worlds  a view of the origin history and the ideological foundation of the phenomenon of the zagreb school of animated film
 beyond selfimages  the context and development of animated documentaries the cornerstones of modern animation in sweden.
 the context and development of animated documentaries the cornerstones of modern animation in sweden
 titoism and the idea of the third road as ideological foundation of zagreb school for animated film
 sketching out the proxy space
 an attempt at reading and understanding the animated film don quixote by vladimir kristl
 the man and the line  monographyc study of the work of animator cartoonist and comics author nedeljko dragic
 black trains through dark landscapes
 the true giant of animation  the combination of skillful fingers and animation technique transformed mundane lumps of clay into some of the 20th centurys funniest and smartest people their home is the famous animation studio aardman.
 the feast of humoristic drawing
 for many immigrants arriving in sweden english is the default language of communication. an important asset in social interaction english can also be a barrier to developing fluency and comprehensibility in swedish. these soft language skills are of crucial importance for successful integration. however they cannot be adequately acquired in formal learning derwing  munro 2013. consequently each time english is used in social interaction an opportunity to develop communicative competence in swedish is lost.
 aibased quality control of wood surfaces with autonomous material handling
 welding of nonnominal geometries  physical tests
 influence of vibration induced disturbances in an automatic inspection cell
 a look at the optimization of robot welding speed based on process modelling
 three dimensional simulation of robot path heat transfer and residual stresses of a welded part with complex geometry
 three dimensional simulation of robot path heat transfer and residual stresses of a tigwelded part with complex geometry
 computer aided robotics combined with a finite element analysis for process simulation of welding
 offline programming of robots for metal deposition
 development of an intelligent robotized machine vision automated system for bacterial growth monitoring
 virtual commissioning of machine vision applications in aero engine manufacturing
 weld joint tracking system in an automatic inspection cell by using emissivity variation
 motion synthesizer platform for moving manikins
 simulation fo robot paths and heat effects in welding
 simulation of robotic tigwelding
 noncontact temperature measurements using an infrared camera in aerospace welding applications
 threedimensional simulation of robot path and heat transfer of a tigwelded part with complex geometry
 virtual machine vision in computer aided robotics
 as an audio engineer sound is my bag in all shapes and forms but might also find me behind the camera.
 this extension of miljofia aims to continue to build a competes center for flexible and innovative automation by building the most modern automation laboratory at production technology center ptc. several demonstraters will be develop in collaboration with sme companies. this is an extension of the project miljofia.
 wp 1  infrastructure for flexibility
 simplified reuse and setup of process modules
 standardized geometrical electrical and logical interfaces
 integrated safety for collaboration
 common fieldbus based on opcua
 avoid bad ergonomic postures and heavy liftings
 new and innovative robots for collaboration
 automation to match different physical and social needs
 an including efficient and secure working environment
 automatically individualized information
 situational based information
 user friendly handling of complex automation equipment
 wp 4  methods for flexibility
 reuse of knowledge and automation equipment intelligence
 easy configuration rather than programming of equipment
 autonomous multiagent based system
 learning systems
 miljofia aims for flexible and innovative automation by building the most modern automation laboratory at production technology center ptc.
 mindfulness for students and staff
 employees and students are offered mindfulness in ivs light therapy room g341 on tuesday afternoons.
 time 14.3015.00  january 17 to march 7.10 persons each time.you book a place here.bookings are made one week at a time  from wednesdays you can book mindfulness on tuesday the following week.
 come as you are no change of cloths needed.the activity is free of charge.both beginners and experienced are warmly welcome.
 sincerely ingrid tano iv
 the survey student barometer showed that courses in canvas are perceived as difficult to navigate. as part of the effort to make it easier for students the course menu will be modified.
 this will be available in the autumn canvas courses.
 the menu items that will be visible by default are home  announcements  syllabus  assignments  discussions  grades  people. the remaining menu items will be hidden. however this does not prevent you from presenting them in a visible position if desired. this can be done in the courses settings under the navigation tab.
 mohit gupta about sicomap
 associate professor in production technology
 courses in which i have been involved in teaching are xx5797  advanced production technology fmb300  finite element analysis vfd900  heat transfer tdc500  thermodynamics mta101  mechanical engineering and supervision of bachelor and master internship and thesis students.
 thermal spraying thermal barrier coatings tbcs solid oxide fuel cells sofcs suspension plasma spraying sps high velocity air fuel hvaf spraying atmospheric plasma spraying aps finite element modelling fem.
 influence of nozzle configuration and particle size on characteristics and sliding wear behaviour of hvafsprayed wccocr coatings
 effect of spray angle and substrate material on formation mechanisms and properties of hvaf sprayed coatings
 assessment of crfeconi and alcrfeconi highentropy alloys as bond coats for thermal barrier coatings
 columnar thermal barrier coatings produced by different thermal spray processes
 influence of test conditions on sliding wear performance of high velocity air fuelsprayed wccocr coatings
 microstructural changes in suspension plasmasprayed tbcs deposited on complex geometry substrates
 microstructure and failure analysis of suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 microstructures and properties of thermal barrier coatings deposited by hybrid waterstabilized plasma torch
 development of bondcoats for high lifetime suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 influence of bondcoat surface characteristics on lifetime in suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 effect of bondcoat and substrate chemistry on oxide growth and lifetime in suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 multilayered suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings for high temperature gas turbine applications
 influence of bondcoat spray process on lifetime of suspension plasmasprayed thermal barrier coatings
 improving the lifetime of suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 bilayer suspension plasmasprayed thermal barrier coatings with enhanced thermal cyclic lifetime  experiments and modeling
 influence of process parameters on microstructure and permeability of axial suspension plasma sprayed electrolytes in sofcs
 liquid feedstock plasma spraying as an emerging process for advanced thermal barrier coatings
 effect of columnar cracks and dense layer in suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings on the coating stresses under thermal shock loadings  a modelling approach
 electrochemical performance of plasma sprayed metal supported planar solid oxide fuel cells
 design of thermal barrier coatings  a modelling approach
 stress and cracking during chromiaspinelnio cluster formation in thermal barrier coating systems
 influence of topcoatbondcoat interface roughness on stresses and lifetime in thermal barrier coatings
 design of microstructures in thermal barrier coatings  a modelling approach
 a modelling approach to design of microstructures in thermal barrier coatings
 design of low thermal conductivity thermal barrier coatings by finite element modelling
 advances in thermally sprayed wcbased wearresistant coatings  cofree binders processing routes and tribological behavior
 influence of spray angle on microstructure and lifetime of suspension plasmasprayed thermal barrier coatings
 porous thermal barrier coatings for enhancing the efficiency of internal combustion engines
 influence of nozzle configuration and particle size on characteristics and sliding wear behaviour of hvafsprayed wccocr coatings
 effect of suspension characteristics on the performance of thermal barrier coatings deposited by suspension plasma spray
 microstructures and thermal cycling properties of thermal barrier coatings deposited by hybrid waterstabilized plasma torch
 design of high lifetime suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 hot gas corrosion and its influence on the thermal cycling performance of suspension plasma spray tbcs
 microstructural evolution and sintering of suspension plasmasprayed columnar thermal barrier coatings
 failure analysis of multilayered suspension plasmasprayed thermal barrier coatings for gas turbine applications
 influence of suspension characteristics on microstructure of axial suspension plasmasprayed coatings
 development of bondcoat layer for long lifetime suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 failure analysis of thermally cycled columnar thermal barrier coatings produced by highvelocityair fuel and axialsuspensionplasma spraying  a design perspective
 liquid feedstock plasma spraying  an emerging process for advanced thermal barrier coatings
 influence of topcoatbondcoat interface on lifetime in suspension sprayed therma barrier coatings
 liquid feedstock plasma spraying  an emerging processfor the next generation aircraft engines
 spraying of solid oxide fuel cells
 development of plasma sprayed niysz anodes for metal supported solidoxide fuel cells
 a diffusionbased oxide layer growth model using real interface roughness in thermal barrier coatings for lifetime assessment
 influence of topcoatbondcoat interface roughness on stresses and lifetime inthermal barrier coatings
 an experimental study of microstructure  property relationships in thermal barrier coatings
 design of next generation thermal barrier coatings experiments and modelling
 mohit kumar gupta nicholas curry nicolaie markocsan per nylén robert vaßen
 relationships between coating microstructure and thermal conductivity in thermal barrier coatings  a modelling approach
 ingrid tano per nylen jan wigren mohit kumar gupta nicholas curry
 work tasks responsible for the library databases responsible for the librarys electronic resources ejournals ebooks etc. library statistics
 monica orwehag
 scholarly skills as everyday practice  implications for education
 inga wernersson monica hansen orwehag
 the undergraduate thesis in academic professional education teachers nurses and social workers  a study of supervisors and examiners perspectives
 monica hansen orwehag anncharlott lindström thomas winman
 informatics with specialization in workintegrated learning
 technologies designed and used are learning management systems lms webmeeting systems instructional videos applications for learning content production and virtualization of labs. the results up til now show a broad variation of industry readiness of taking part in these kinds of competence initiatives. nine courses of 2.5 ects have been designed and implemented in the project and comprise knowledge within industrial automation machining mechanicsfem and matematical statistics. further development will continue in the project prodex  expert in production technology in swedish
 main supervisor is professor lars svensson university west school of business economics and it assistant supervisors are phd lennart malmsköld and kristina eriksson department of engineering science.
 hattinger m. and spante m. 2016. mediated and situated engineering education  teachers beliefs and experiences of digitalization of elearning courses. in review for publication in learning media and technlogy submitted in september 2016.
 hattinger m. eriksson k. malmsköld l.  svensson l. 2014. elearning readiness and absorptive capacity in the manufacturing industry. international journal of advanced corporate learning ijac 73 pp. 3340.
 publications  conferences
 hattinger m. spante m.  ruijan d. 2014. mediated and situated engineering education. in proceedings of world conference on elearning in corporate government healthcare and higher education 2014 chesapeake va aace.
 hattinger m. 2014. organisational elearning readiness for technology enhanced competence initiatives in the manufacturing industry. in proceedings of icelw june 11th13th new york usa.
 hattinger m. christierningustafsson l.  eriksson k. 2013. digitizing work organizational workintegrated learning through technology mediated courses in manufacturing industry. paper presented at the 18th wace world conference on cooperative  workintegrated education june 2427 2013 durban south africa.
 nilsson s. hattinger m. bernhardsson l.  svensson l. 2011. designing the cloudboardan ict tool for online tutoring in higher education. paper presented at the society for information technology  teacher education international conference.
 hattinger m.  treurnicht n. 2011. learning aspects for manufacturing enterprises within aerospace industry entering into quality standard as9100. in proceedings of 24th icde world conference on open and distance learning 2011 nusa dua bali.
 snis u. l. bernheim b.g.  hattinger m. 2004. towards a new design metaphor supporting boundary objects as means of knowledge sharing in community networks. ecis 2004 proceedings 169.
 smart coordination requires operators in the loop
 making space for time  strategies for the design of timeaware hybrid work
 universityindustry collaboration  from contradictions to transformations in workintegrated elearning practices
 realtime analytics through industrial internet of things  lessons learned from datadriven industry
 collaboration for lifelonglearning and contract education  towards a competence development model
 contextualizing competence and learning for industry 4.0
 the role of learning centers for communities of distance education
 the role of the learning centers for webbased distance education
 towards a new design metaphor  supporting boundary objects as means of knowledge sharing in community networks
 from contradictions to transformation  a study of joint workintegrated elearning between industry and university
 unpacking social media to explore professionals work practice
 organizational elearning readiness for technology enhanced competence initiatives in the manufacturing industry
 mediated and situated engineering education
 evaluating an augmented reality prototype for enhanced user guidance in an industrial production context
 transforming quality 4.0 towards resilient operator 5.0 needs
 designing digital support for operator and maintenance personnel cognition and future skills in manufacturing industry
 knowing the practice of industry 4.0 through industrial workintegrated learning
 sharing thoughts and associations  towards a neural metaphor supporting boundary objects in community networks
 managing distributed learning in higher education
 coconstructing expertise  competence development through workintegrated elearning in joint industryuniversity collaboration
 efforts at the boundaries  social media use in swedish municipalities
 learning aspects for manufacturing enterprises within aerospace industry entering into quality standard as9100
 monika hattinger nico treurnicht
 monitoring of education quality
 here you can take part in the followups of quality that are done through course evaluations and for all education programs at högskolan väst including the doctoral programs.
 after each course a course evaluation in canvas is automatically carried out at the end of the course. after the course evaluation has been completed the teacher responsible for the course gives feedback to the students by publishing a course evaluation response on the courses page in canvas.
 course evaluation response is a compilation of the students views and suggestions as well as the responsible teachers comments about this. the course evaluation response must be made available to the students within five weeks after the end of the course.
 annual faculty followup of education quality
 every year the departments conduct an analysis of the quality of their respective education programs.
 please see this page in swedish for links to the the latest reports from each department.
 please see this page in swedish for a link to the the latest report.
 the quality of the universitys two doctoral programs is also monitored every year.
 please see this page in swedish for links to the the latest reports.
 please see this page in swedish for the results.
 more international students than ever before
 university west is admitting 932 new international students for autumn 2023. this is a record increase of over 50 percent compared to last year and is the second largest increase in sweden.
 the admission for university wests international masters program has now been published and the first students have received their acceptance notices.
 932 new masters students from all over the world have been admitted to programmes at university west for autumn 2023. last year the number of admitted students was 615 which means an increase of 51.5 percent this year. with that increase university west ranks second on the list of the largest increase in the country.
 nationally the number of admissions has increased by 6.7 percent writes the swedish council for higher education.
 it feels amazing that we are seeing a large increase in international applicants to our masters programmes also this year says tomas bengtsson director of international affairs at university west. it is especially nice that many of our engineering programmes have received more applicants as we know that many of our partners are in great need of these skills.
 some of the programmes that have increased the most in the number of admitted students are
 master in leadership in digitized organizations.
 master in cyber security
 many of university wests international masters programmes are still open for late application. this means that the final number of admitted students to the university is not yet known. and on april 5 the admission for the international bachelors programme international program in politics and economics ippe will be published.
 now we work on getting the students well prepared for their arrival in august and im keeping my fingers crossed that they wont have as big a problem with getting a residence permit as was the case in 2022 concludes tomas bengtsson.
 see our programmes here
 monitoring and control of laser beam butt joint welding
 optical detection of joint position in zero gap laser beam welding
 vision systems for inprocess monitoring of laser beam welding
 autumn 2014  questionnaire survey of secondary school english teachers n252 at 64 randomlyselected schools
 autumn 2015  spring 2016  lesson observations n258 in the classrooms of 16 teachers identified as having a motivational practice
 henry a. korp h. sundqvist p.  thorsen c. 2018. motivational strategies and the reframing of english activity design and challenges for teachers in contexts of extensive extramural encounters. tesol quarterly 52 2 247273. pdf
 henry a.  thorsen c. 2018. teacherstudent relationships and l2 motivation. modern language journal 102 1 218241. pdf
 henry a.  thorsen c. 2018 advance access. teachers selfdisclosures and influences on students motivation a relational perspective. international journal of bilingualism and bilingual education. pdf
 henry a.  thorsen c.  2019. weaving webs of connection empathy perspective taking and students motivation. studies in second language learning and teaching. pdf
 henry a.  2019. online media creation and l2 motivation a sociallysituated perspective. pdf
 henry a. sundqvist p.  thorsen c. 2019. motivational practice insights from the classroom. lund studentlitteratur.first chapter pdf
 korp h. henry a.  sundqvist p. 2014. multisited ethnography as a means for studying good practice in esl classrooms. oxford united kingdom 15th 17thseptember.
 korp h thorsen c henry a.  sundqvist p. 2015. differences in english teachers approaches to pupils outofschool english encounters in relation to school and pupil demographic factors. nfpf nera. gothenburg sweden 4th 6th march.
 sundqvist p. korp h.  henry a. 2015. generating engagement a content analysis of the motivational qualities in efl teachers descriptions of motivating activities. american association of applied linguistics aaal conference toronto canada 21st24th march.
 henry a.  sundqvist p. 2016. creativity and mobile devices in intensive group projects. american association of applied linguistics aaal conference orlando florida 9th12th april.
 henry a.  sundqvist p. 2016. intensive group projects in the l2 english classroom a path to successful teaching. språk så in i norden. stockholm sweden 18th april.
 henry a.  sundqvist p. 2016. combating demotivation intensive group projects in l2 english classrooms. asla uppsala sweden 22 april.
 henry a.  sundqvist p. 2016. intensive group projects directed motivational currents in language classrooms. psychology of language learning 2 pll2. jyväskylä finland 2224th august.
 henry a. 2017. the triggering of students transportable identities in classroom interaction the role of teacher selfrevelation. american association of applied linguistics aaal conference portland oregon 18th21st march.
 thorsen c.  henry a. 2017. culturally responsive mindsets motivational teaching practice in efl classrooms. american association of applied linguistics aaal conference portland oregon 18th21st march.
 thorsen c.  henry a. 2018.  online media production and l2 motivation an ethnographic study. pll3 tokyo june 8th.
 thorsen c.  henry a. 2018. l2 motivation and students engagement with digital media an empiricallygrounded account. exploring language education stockholm june 20th.
 exchange studies possible during tbc semester of studies.
 work integrated political studies
 within the masters program workintegrated political studies great exchange opportunities are offered with our partner universities the university of the western cape uwc and the central university of technology cut.
 south africauniversity of the western cape uwccentral univeristy of technlology cut
 leadership in digitalised organisations masters program
 msc manufacturing engineering
 germanytechnical university of dortmunduniversity of applied sciences kaiserslautern
 msc operations management
 multiagent systems parttime campus mas600
 atm700automation systems or the equivalent.
 multi factor authentication for vpn
 due to the events at umeå university as a security measure it have prioritized changing our vpn so that mfa will be required to log in. it are changing the authentication method for all users on friday afternoon which will probably mean that those of you who work over vpn will be disconnected and have to reconnect. to connect with sso you need to edit the profile in forticlient. guide available here
 multilayered coatings for nonstick applications
 the main function of a nonstick coating is to facilitate an easy removal of a product from its surface. examples of applications are pressure sensitive tapes antifouling paints repelling surfaces on aircraft wings coatings on biomedical implants and nonstick bakeware. a particularly demanding application of interest in this project is the molding of polyurethane that is heavily used today in the automotive industry. replacement of the existing surface technology with this type of coatings has thus both industrial and scientific interest.
 the purpose of this project is to develop a completely new type of abhesions coatings using innovative multilayer systems. the objective is to evaluate an innovative technique in which a multilayer system is used to create abhesions coatings with enhanced mechanical performances. the coatings must be resistant to wear and eliminate the need for solventbased waxes for the production of polyurethane foams. the hypothesis is that the combination of a hard coating with a polymerbased top coat may provide customized features for wear friction adhesion wettability and thermal properties. the challenge here is to prevent the ptfe or other fluoropolymerbased coatings to wear out too easily.
 it is designed on the basis of a 5axis milling machine which has been expanded by a very powerful turning table. this makes turning operations possible as well. the table is suitable for a wide variety of milling and turning applications for large and bulky work pieces.
 all students at university west have access to the universitys network and services by using their personal university west account. my account is the system where you manage your account and edit your personal information such as description text and picture of yourself. its also where you go if you have forgot your password or wish to extend your account.
 follow the instructions in the email information from university west to create your account.
 when you create your account you choose a password for your uwaccount. you also choose a personal code for your west card which you need for access to the university buildings library loans computer print outs and photocopying etc. your userid and password also enables you to gain access to the universitys wireless network. you should read the user agreement very carefully.
 you can later go into my account and change your password and change several other details.
 open an existing account
 if you have an account already you should continue to use that account. if it is closed you can use a self service to open it. open an existing account in the system my account.
 do you need to change your password or post a picture of yourself?
 then go to the system my account and click edit. here you can among other things
 upload an image to be displayed in canvas
 change mobile number
 for how long will your account be open?
 one year after your latest registration on a course with us your account will be closed. this means that you can no longer access your files email onedrive or office applications if you have installed office 365 proplus with your university west license. remember to copy the material files emails and attachments that you want to save before your account is closed.
 if you have made a study break or need more time for any other reason you can extend the account opening time for another year. you can open and extend the account by yourself through the system my account click unable to log in.
 your userid and password are valuable and you should make sure to handle them carefully. if you suspect that your password might have fallen into the wrong hands you should change it immediately. avoid using your university password for other purposes. go to my account and change your password.
 remember that you are personally responsible for what happens when the universitys systems are used via access from your userid and password.
 if you have forgotten your password you can simply go to my account and send yourself a password reset link to  the cell phone number or the private email adress that you entered when you activated you account.
 when you get your userid and password you will also automatically get an email address that you should use during your period of study at university west. your email address is created in accordance with the following format name.surname@student.hv.se. in order to access your email go to office 365. more about email.
 go to my account
 my exams will be unavailable until thursday february 29  due to system maintentance.
 my files
 when you log on to a computer at university west and open the browser youll notice that you have several different drives e. g. h. here is a brief description what they mean and what they contain.
 the home directory h is a safe place where you can save your files. whenever you log on to the universitys system you are automatically connected to your own saved files. the home directory is located under this pc and has a name that corresponds with your username.
 your home directory works just like a folder. you can create files and folders and delete and rename them. the size of your home directory is limited to 10gb. the home directory is located on the universitys server and is beeing backed up on a regular basis.
 is used by various software installed on university computers including settings files. you can not save anything here.
 here teachers can upload files and folders that may be needed before and during a laboratory experiment. students can open or copy files that are here but can not save anything.
 is an area where all students can save and delete files temporarily so here you should not save files you want to keep. important to know is that the service  it department can not restore files that disappeared from t . the service  it department cleans this area periodically and deletes all files.
 these drives can also be accessed from any internet connected computer via files.hv.se. you log in with your university west username and password.
 important to remember
 it is good to have multiple copies of the most important files.
 usb flash drives are good but they can easily break or get lost. be sure to store your files on at least one more drive e.g. your homedirectory h.
 do not save any files in my documents on the universitys computers. my documents is connected to the local disk drive c  and the files here can be deleted at any time. you have to actively choose to save at h.
 to my files
 for some programme students there may be a choice of courses or information about placement. we have gathered this here under my program.
 does this apply to me?
 if you need to make a choice get access to information about vfu you will receive information during the course of the education. here you can also see which programs are being phased out.click on your program to see which choices or information are relevant to you.
 3d animation and visualization no information to show at the momentdigital media no information to show at the momentbusiness and economics programme no information to show at the momentbachelor of science in electrical powerteacher training programmesurveying engineering programme tglaireal estate economics programme real estate and finance no information to show at the momenthuman resources specialistsocial pedagoguesocial psychiatric carenursing programmesystem development it and society no information to show at the moment
 specialist nurse no information to show at the momentchild and youth studies no information to show at the moment
 a project about nanostructured thermal barrier coatings.
 a thermal barrier coating tbc system is designed to protect a gas turbine component from high temperatures. development of tbcs allowing higher combustion temperatures is of high interest for all turbine manufactures since it results in a more complete combustion which in turn results in higher fuel efficiency as well as environmentally cleaner emissions.
 a 1 increase in engine efficiency of a medium sized power plant of 300 mw would result in estimated savings of more than 2 myear in fuel costs and approximately 25 000 tyear reductions in co2 emissions. nanostructured tbcs produced by suspension plasma spraying sps can significantly improve the thermal insulation ability due to a very fine porous microstructure. sps tbcs are of significant commercial interest as the technique is considerably cheaper than commercially used electron beam physical vapour deposition ebpvd both in terms of equipment cost as well as running cost in addition to higher deposition rates. however nanostructured tbcs produced by sps have not yet been commercially introduced due to low reliability and life expectancy of the coatings.
 improvements in reliability and lifetime of sps tbcs which enables an alternative to the ebpvd process would result in huge cost savings as well as lower emissions. the coatings functional performance i.e. thermal conductivity and lifetime is strongly dependent on its microstructure interface characteristics and feedstocksubstrate materials. to enhance the coatings functional performance a fundamental understanding of relationships between materials interface characteristics microstructure formation and functional performance is essential which is the scientific aim of this project. the industrial aim is to develop a coating solution with improved functional performance.
 it is anticipated that the project will lead to a new coating system with low thermal conductivity and long lifetime but at a fraction of the cost as compared to ebpvd coatings having impact in both existing and new applications. the industrial partners in this project are siemens turbomachinery and gkn aerospace. the development of next generation tbcs matches the companies plans very well in strengthening their positions in design and manufacture of gas turbines for land and aero based applications.
 american psychiatric association 2013. american psychiatric association. diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 5thed. american psychiatric association washington dc.
 april k. a. dharani b.  peters k. 2012. impact of locus of control expectancy on level of wellbeing. review of european studies 4 124137.
 bandura a. 2001. social cognitive theory an agentic perspective. annual review of   psychology 52 126.
 bandura a. 1991. social cognitive theory of selfregulation. organizational behavior
 and human decision processes 50 248.
 choo h. gentile d. a. sim t. li d. d. khoo a.  liau a. k. 2010. pathological videogaming among singaporean youth. annals academy of medicine singapore 39 822829.
 ford m. e. 1992. human motivation goals emotions and personal agency beliefs. newbury park ca sage.
 floyd f. j. seltzer m. m. greenberg j. s.  song j. 2013. parental bereavement during midtolater life pre to postbereavement functioning and intrapersonal resources for coping. psychology and aging 28 402413.
 king d. l.  delfabbro p. h. 2013. issues for dsm5 videogaming disorder? australian and new zealand journal of psychiatry 47 2022.
 kuczynski l.  de mol j. in press 2015. dialectical models of socialization. in w. f. overton  p. c. m. molenaar eds.. theory and method. volume 1 of the handbook of child psychology and developmental science. 7th ed. editorinchief richard m. lerner. hoboken nj wiley.
 lecompte v. moss e. cyr c.  pascuzzo k. 2014. preschool attachment selfesteem and the development of preadolescent anxiety and depressive symptoms. attachment  human development 16 242260.
 männikkö n. billieux j.  kääriäinen m. 2015. problematic digital gaming behavior and its relation to the psychological social and physical health of finnish adolescents and young adults. journal of behavioral addictions 44 281288.
 rehbein f. psych g. kleimann m. mediasci g.  mößle t. 2010. prevalence and risk factors of video game dependency in adolescence results of a german nationwide study. cyberpsychology behavior and social networking 13 269277.
 van rooij a. j. ferguson c. j. carras m. c. kardefeltwinther d. shi j. aarseth e.  przybylski a. k. 2018. a weak scientific basis for gaming disorder  let us err on the side of caution. journal of behavioral addictions 71 19.
 weinstein a.  lejoyeux m. 2010. internet addiction or excessive internet use. the american journal of drug and alcohol abuse 36 277283.
 narratives as natural resources in mental health care
 in this multidisciplinary project the position and meaning of narratives the possibilities and limitations to a clinical practice centered on the personal narrative as well as stories creative writing and other art forms will be investigated from the perspective of clients and clinicians children young and elderly.
 narratives and mental health fragmentations disruptions  silences  an interdisciplinary and international conference university of paderborn germany.
 göteborgs universitet elisabeth punzi  niclas hagenuniversity of paderborn tyskland jarmila mildorf  christoph singeruniversity of poitiers frankrike nicolas daumankennesaw university usa olaf berwald
 phd associate professordocent in business administration
 knowledge management.
 within the first theme entrepreneurship  learning nataliya particularly focuses on how entrepreneurial individuals and organizations develop knowledge needed for new opportunity identification and pursuit through different learning experiences as well as how they act on these opportunities.
 vicechairperson university wests academic appointments committee
 member faculty board school of business economics and it university west
 associate editor the learning organization emerald
 entrepreneurship entrepreneurial firms small and mediumsized enterprises knowledge learning knowledge management knowledge loss universityindustry collaboration networks internationalization
 workplace learning  a way to develop entrepreneurial employees
 what happens after rapid growth?  a study of sustainable highgrowth entrepreneurship in sweden
 learning with linkedin  students perceptions of incorporating subjectrelated blogging in an international marketing course
 fueling entrepreneurial passion among university graduates by integrating learning experiences within and outside the university  insights from a configurational study
 drivers of entrepreneurial passion among graduates in venture creation programs
 one foot in industry the other in academia   why professional services want adjunct professors as employees?
 adjunct professors at professional service firms just links between the industry and the academy or?
 use of social media based assignments in teaching international marketing  results and reflections
 academic merites msc digital business development bsc business administration psychology 135 ects
 previous job experience worked for a decade at an audit firm most recently in management consulting 20182023.
 information och material
 internationalisering  vietnamhanoi
 internationalisering  indien dharamsala
 internationalisering  linneauspalmeutbyte
 bharathisadan university department of social work and university west uw department for social and behavioural studies general aim is to develop collaboration into a long term mutually beneficial partnership which within our students and teachers can enquire global knowledge by learning about social work as an academic discipline and professional practice in india and sweden.
 internationalisering  nordplus
 kerstin von brömssen är medlem i studiecirkel 8 futures of education cultural diversity imaginations and collective transformations in time of the anthropocene.
 information om digital plattform
 introduktion till programmering med python
 avancerad routing och switching  ccnp 1
 exchange studies possible during 1st semester of studies on extended programme year påbyggnadsår
 hungaryuniversity of debrechen
 netherlandsfontys university of applied sciences eindhovenhan
 internationalizations of social pedagogy
 hotell bele 46 520125 30first hotel kung oscar 46 520 470 470scandic swania 46 520 89 000gula villan vandrarhem 46 520129 60
 faith and friendships empowering older people in conditions of precarity karl hedman.pdf
 information och program
 network maintenance 20240523
 network work is in progress during the day there is a low risk of shortterm disruptions in internet traffic.
 network technology for iot and industrial communicaiton parttime campus nik400
 the course covers fundamental knowledge within network technology for iot and industrial communication. starting by looking at existing techniques we progress to modern wired and wireless technique for communication localization and posititioning. during the course we carry out practical exercises around different communication technologies to reach a deeper understanding. the course also includes online programming of industrial robots to get familiar to industrial applications. in the end each student carry out their own study to be presented in the final poster session.
 others members of the network are
 university of gothenburg
 the centre is also part of another network together with the university of gothenburg and the university of borås. this network was initiated by region västra götalands secretariat for culture and focuses on the issues of culture integration and interculturality.
 this platform is important for university west in several ways. since activity theory has a close connection to work integrated learning wil we can contribute with knowledge and competence to the subject of wil. at the same time we have the opportunity to strengthen the universitys position and international network within wil. of course our students will also be able to benefit greatly from the tools and knowledge that the platform provides kristina points out.
 about activity theory
 contact kristina johansson associate professor in education university west.
 more about the centre for activity center
 new collaborations with african universities
 africa is an increasingly important part of the world economically and culturally but the interaction between university west and african universities has so far been somewhat limited. but the two new projects aim to change that.
 the projects are designated to the department of social and behavioural studies and the department of engineering science.
 diversity in education and teacher education
 the project diversity in education and teacher education conducted at the department of social and behavioural studies is led by professor kerstin von brömssen at university west together with colleague ambissa kenea boru associate professor at addis ababa university in ethiopia.
 the internationalization work leads to a higher quality in education. it means among other things that you get international perspectives on what you are learning and the possibility to exchange experiences kerstin explains. when it comes to teachers in particular it is important to have a perspective on how the view on education differs around the world. students in swedish schools come from all parts of the world so a swedish perspective is no longer enough.
 kerstin explains that the project will focus on diversity and teacher education. these are not only important issues here in sweden but also in ethiopia.
 one of the projects goals is to make it possible for students and teachers to meet on site and exchange experiences and knowledge.
 the goal is for us to be able to visit each other but we will have to wait and see when we can travel and establish these contacts says kerstin. we must learn from each other. to meet and take part in each others view of knowledge people and resources is very important.
 international collaboration in production technology
 a new detailed plan for the campus area is one of the priority projects in campus development.
 work on a new detail plan is underway in the city of trollhättan.
 new electrical engineering courses address industrys major competence needs
 to tackle the significant green technical transition and electrification of society engineers in various industries need to build new skills. university west and uppsala university are now developing about twenty courses in close collaboration with the industry. the first courses will start in january 2024.
 vehicle manufacturers electric energy producers electricity distributors technology companies and many other stakeholders face an urgent need for new expertise in electrical engineering. demand is rapidly increasing as the vehicle fleet becomes electrified. at the same time major challenges are anticipated for the energy system as electricity demand rises sharply nondispatchable electricity production expands and electricity needs to be distributed over increasingly longer distances.
 university west and several other institutions are now working intensively to address the competence need with new programs and courses tailored for working engineers.
 theory and practice
 in a newly launched educational initiative funded by the knowledge foundation university west and uppsala university will develop around twenty advancedlevel courses for working engineers. the course offerings will be broad to match the industrys extensive need for both theoretical depth and applied knowledge for future electrification. a significant portion of the courses will be offered at both university west and uppsala university.
 in january 2024 the first round of courses will start allowing working engineers to deepen their knowledge while continuing their regular work. at the same time university west will also launch a new masters program in electrical engineering which will include several of these courses says boel ekergård who is the project leader for the educational initiative.
 the courses are being developed in close collaboration with twelve companies from various industries atlas copco gkn aerospace hitachi intel polestar svenska kraftnät tengineering vattenfall alstom swedish electromobility centre sandvik and standup for energy.
 the companies are involved in the entire development process to ensure that the course content matches the industrys needs effectively. our industry partners will also contribute with guest lectures site visits lab work collaboration on theses and in many other ways.
 a key aspect of the development work is designing the courses scope and format to ensure they can be combined with engineers regular work.
 university west has extensive experience in developing short courses for professionals. we also have established methods for validating real competence in industry professionals.
 the course offerings are planned to cover the following knowledge areas
 electrical drivelines. energy storage. power electronics. control in electric vehicles. measurement systems. electronics. charging. electricity production. stability in the power grid. electrical machines free from rare earth metals. sustainability concerning materials and production of electric vehicles. control systems for electric vehicleselectrical solutions for control systems. analysis and design with respect to electromagnetic compatibility. electric vehicles.
 published  20230530
 new knowledge could enable more efficient production of hydrogenpowered space rockets
 in the future powder bedbased am could enable more efficient production of hydrogenpowered space rocket engine components. photo by arianegroup.
 hydrogen is a commonly used space rocket fuel. it is also a wellknown fact that metals exposed to hydrogen risk becoming brittle a phenomenon that needs to be considered when designing and sizing rocket engines. the nickelbased superalloy alloy 718 is widely used in conventional rocket engine component manufacturing. the alloys sensitivity to hydrogen embrittlement has been managed with great success when sizing existing hydrogenpowered rocket engines.
 however in recent years the manufacturing industrys interest in additive manufacturing using metals has increased dramatically. this technique which involves melting metals a layer at a time into a finished near net shape component has seen major improvements explains robert pederson professor in materials engineering university west.
 am techniques enable you to manufacture components using less material at a lower cost and with greater functionality than conventional manufacturing methods offer.
 since rocket engine components are generally manufactured in relatively small numbers and often have complex geometries powder bedbased am is a competitive alternative to todays conventional manufacturing techniques. the manufacturer can cut development time quickly implement design modifications and reduce the number of constituent components by incorporating several functions in a single component.
 in this new project we plan to develop more knowledge about the phenomenon of hydrogen embrittlement so that we can use alloy 718 in powder bedbased am for components exposed to hydrogen. in particular in hydrogen environments involving the high pressures to which rocket engine components can be exposed.
 if we succeed we will be able to manufacture hydrogenpowered space rocket components much more efficiently.
 collaboration with gkn aerospace
 university west has spent several years accumulating metallurgy expertise on the use of alloy 718 in powder bedbased am. the university also has expertise in the effects of hydrogen on the mechanical properties of conventionally manufactured metal components.
 the results of this project will improve gkns ability to manufacture rocket engine components using powder bedbased am. since hydrogen is also a strong candidate for supplementing and replacing the fossil fuels currently used in the aviation and transport sectors we also expect h2ram to help increase swedish expertise in this important field of sustainability.
 h2ram is an acronym for h2 embrittlement of rocket engine components made using an am powder bed.
 contact robert pederson professor in materials engineering
 new knowledge makes it possible to manufacture climatesmart aircraft engines
 new knowledge can contribute to reducing aviations environmental  impact
 with additive manufacturing its possible to produce more efficient and more environmentally friendly aircraft engines. photo airbus
 new opportunities for internationalization from home
 students opportunities for internationalization have been limited by the corona pandemic. but for those who are studying to become a specialist nurse at university west new ways of meeting have made international exchange possible.
 university west has long had an established collaboration with glasgow caledonian university which now has taken a new form. since physical exchanges between the universities is not an option at present new initiatives have been taken for digital.
 the collaboration between university west and glasgow caledonian university has existed for a time. exchanging international experiences through webinars is a new opportunity which has been tried in a previous course. now nurse students in two more courses at university west have had the opportunity to participate in a joint webinar with nurse students from glasgow caledonian university explains annelise tilly lund university lecturer and one of the organizers behind the webinar.
 senior lecturer susanne andersson also one of the organizers behind the webinar points out that exchange does not have to take place on site in order to bring valuable insights.
 you can also compare differences similarities and opportunities digitally says susanne. it is a new way to internationalize  internationalization from home.
 prediabetes and public health
 the focus during the webinar was prediabetes and public health topics that are equally relevant for both swedish and scottish students.
 the approximately 60 students got divided onto in mixed groups where they discussed six patient cases formulated by the teachers in sweden and in scotland.
 based on these patient cases how do you do in scotland compared to sweden? there were many cases where there were clear differences but at the same time there was a lot of similarities between the two countries as well susanne explains.
 the students who participated expressed that it was interesting to learn about the differences and similarities. here are some comments from students who participated in the webinar
 it was really interesting to connect with nurses from another country and find out the differences and similarities.
 i really enjoyed learning about care in sweden and talking to the swedish students. i learned that we are quite similar
 prediabetes which was the focus is not only a public health problem in sweden but also in other parts of the world. one of the big takeaways from webinars like this is that the students get a better and more global perspective.
 we really want to continue to highlight the opportunities for internationalization to make students understand the benefits of collaborations like this says annelise. you increase your knowledge in prediabetes public health and in the role of the specialist nurse. you also get a more global perspective.
 canvas has long been working on a replacement for the quiz tool in canvas. the new tool is called new quizzes and the old ones are now referred to as classic quizzes. no date has been set for when classic quizzes will be discontinued.
 you will primarily see the change when you create or copy a quiz as you will have the option to choose between new quizzes or classic quizzes.
 examples of news and changes in new quizzes
 userfriendliness  for both teachers and students
 better options for formatting text and inserting images
 randomization of question order
 a time gap between attempts
 customization based on the latest attempt
 to facilitate the transition classic quizzes can be migrated to new quizzes. after migration the quiz needs to be reviewed and any necessary adjustments made.
 if you wish to transition to new quizzes you can book a workshop. initially we will conduct workshops until midsummer starting on april 8th. for workshops in english contact akademus@hv.se.
 questions contact the ict educators at akademus@hv.se.
 new record number international applications
 4468 international masters students want to study at university west in the fall of 2023. this is a new record number and an increase of over 20 percent compared to last years numbers.
 last week the official application deadline for international admission to swedens universities passed. this year 4468 international masters students have applied to study at university west in the autumn of 2023. last year this number was 3705 which means that this years number of applications equals an increase of 20.6 percent.
 the corresponding increase nationally is below 10 percent states the swedish council for higher education.
 we are seeing an increase in the number of applicants to all our masters programs says tomas bengtsson director international affairs at university west. it is fantastic that so many have found their way to us here in trollhättan which means that we have attractive programmes that hold up in an international market
 many of the universitys international masters programmes are still open for late application. this means that the final number of applicants is not yet known.
 see our masters programmes here
 increased knowledge and new digital support for the dissemination of knowledge places higher demands on doctors to stay up to date at the same time as it is more difficult to get an overview. in parallel todays patients are often more wellread and informed seek other paths to knowledge than through care and generate their own personal health data. how should doctors navigate this?
 helena vallo hult is an externally employed doctoral student in informatics with specialisation in workintegrated learning at university west and also employed at nu hospital group as a development manager. last friday she presented her dissertation where she studied just this.
 why have you chosen this area?
 i have conducted interviews arranged focus groups and had a survey with swedish resident physicians. the dissertation takes a social technology perspective where information systems are broadly defined to include information technology content and the use of digital technologies in a social context. theories from informatics information science and learning are used to analyse tensions and contradictions that arise in digital work.
 what are your most important findings?
 how do you want to contribute to future development?
 what does the future hold what happens now?
 to the dissertation digital work coping with contradictions in changing healthcare
 traumaadapted yoga in forensic psychiatric care is feasible and yields positive effects
 josefin wikstrom teaches traumaadapted yoga.
 it is the first scientific study of its kind to describe the effect and feasibility of traumaadapted yoga in forensic psychiatry.
 we wanted to explore whether previous positive results with the use of yoga in correctional facilities could be transferred to detained individuals suffering from severe psychiatric disorders. therefore we evaluated traumaadapted yoga as a support within forensic psychiatry says nóra kerekes.
 forensic psychiatry deals with the complex challenges that arise at the intersection of psychiatric illness legal issues and security concerns.
 there are few highquality clinical studies on individuals who have committed crimes and who have a serious mental disorder. what exists are either studies on inmates separately or studies of individuals suffering from various psychiatric disorders. for both of these groups yoga has shown positive effects says nóra kerekes.
 yoga class for 10 weeks
 selfchoice was a central component in the study design where 56 patients at various forensic psychiatric clinics chose to participate. over 10 weeks they either participated in specially developed yoga classes or chose to engage in other forms of physical activity. throughout the study changes in their mental health emotional states antisocial and aggressive behaviors pain perception substance cravings and ability to control their behavior and emotional reactions were observed.
 positive effects measured
 in the current study the yoga group showed remarkable reductions in negative emotional states anxiety paranoid ideation hostility and overall psychological distress. these reductions were not observed in the group performing other forms of physical activities. additionally the yoga group exhibited a significant reduction in pain frequency and showd strengthened selfcontrol and accountability.
 we can conclude that traumaiadapted yoga implemented in a forensic psychiatric setting demonstrates feasibility and results in several positive changes in patients mental health emotional states pain and selfcontrol says nóra kerekes.
 a structured program of traumaadapted yoga for patients and training for healthcare personnel has been developed and has now been confirmed to be feasible and beneficial within forensic psychiatry.
 to the project homepage
 contact about the study nóra kerekes univeristy west nora.kerekes@hv.se  46 739 01 34 03
 contact about traumaadapted yoga and staff trainingjosefin wikström josefin@prisonyoga.org
 building a manufacturing environment in a lab
 although additive manufacturing has been worked on globally for a number of years in different industries and for different applications there are still very few manufacturing industries that have managed to scale up and implement additive manufacturing in mass production.
 additive manufacturing is seen as an important part of the next generation of industrial production where sustainability requirements are high.
 the manufacturing technology has many advantages more efficient use of materials lower energy consumption and shorter lead times compared to traditional forging manufacturing methods such as blacksmithing which require extensive machining.
 contact robert pederson professor of materials technology university west.
 sesam is an acronym for sustainable steel additive manufacturing
 new software facilitates automated manufacturing of unique products
 switching between unique products and lowvolume production will be much faster and make production more flexible says mattias.
 unique customised products are becoming increasingly common in several product segments as is manufacturing lowvolume production. however todays automated manufacturing processes are designed for mass production. every time manufacturing processes need to be changed for a new product specialists need to carry out extensive programming.
 production is at a standstill while programming is being carried out and this costs both time and money explains mattias a recently qualified doctor in production technology at university west. it is therefore not currently profitable to manufacture lowvolume production or unique products using automated processes. instead production is mostly carried out by humans sometimes with the support of robots for certain operations.
 in simple terms the plug  produce concept consists of a number of autonomous units which we call agents. an agent can represent anything from a drilling tool a robot or a part that needs be manufactured to a mobile device that moves components between agents. all agents are equipped with different abilities based on their tasks within the manufacturing process. they can communicate with each other and with the framework.
 the framework ive developed for plug  produce makes it easier to move add and remove different operations within a manufacturing process. the software is configurable and generic and can be used for many different types of products and manufacturing processes.
 another effect is that less work is required from operators. for industrial companies that currently carry out production in lowcost countries this could present opportunities to move production back to sweden.
 cooperation with companies
 an important element of mattias work has involved testing the software in the plug  produce facility at the production technology centre in trollhättan. several companies including gkn aerospace have participated in his project and have been able to test and apply the program in their production processes.
 its a good feeling having built something from scratch and then seeing that it works in practice. but there are challenges that need to be worked on. it will take a few more years before the software is fully developed and ready for use in live production. i hope to be part of that journey and to help us achieve our goal.
 read mattias bennulfs thesis a control framework for industrial plug  produce
 welcome as a new international student at university west here we have gathered the most relevant information you need to get started with your studies. you are strongly recommended to read through this information carefully.
 checklist before starting studies
 go through our checklist and arrive in sweden as well prepared as possible.
 go to checklist before start of studies
 checklist starting your studies
 go through our checklist and kickstart your studies once you have arrived in sweden.
 go to checklist starting your studies
 videos introducing you to university west
 we have made some videos to make your introduction to university west a bit easier.
 go to videos introducing you to university west
 activities arranged by the student union for all new students at university west
 student support and service
 new thesis critical of the swedish armed forces exercise practice
 in a new thesis from university west major martin schüler examines the safety climate within the swedish armed forces and how the organization utilises the experiences that come up in connection with exercises. the results show among other things that there are shortcomings in safety work and that exercise elements rarely lead to learning.
 the swedish armed forces should have more exercises that are not preplanned and approach exercises that can provide actual learning he says.
 in his thesis safety climate in a military organization in the subject of workintegrated learning martin schüler focusses on safety and learning in the swedish armed forces with the purpose of developing a survey tool to investigate the safety climate and the relationship between safety and learning in military work.
 much of my thesis is about military capability and how the swedish armed forces handle safety. safety is seen as something that is separate from operations and that is added on as an afterthought instead of including it in planning from the beginning.
 there were some parts of exercises where i didnt really fully understand why we did what we did. why do you expose staff to dangerous situations in peacetime and why do you think thats okay? i also had colleagues in the swedish armed forces who were good at safety work who were pushed aside and whose skills were not valued i wanted to find out why this was.
 measuring military capability and working preventively
 within the framework of working on the thesis he has adapted a survey instrument for mapping the safety climate that suits the swedish armed forces and the needs of military personnel. the tool can measure safety climates in several different areas of the military organization and areas such as support from management ethics physical training and vulnerability have been added to capture situations faced by military personnel. it can be used both to measure military capability and to work preventively with safety issues. during the course of the work several different areas have emerged as particularly interesting such as support from management when it comes to safety issues.
 many people in senior positions have learned to speak passionately about safety. people know that it is considered important but that doesnt show when work is planned and the conditions for it to have an effect in the organization arent there. many of the internal safety regulations are also not written for those who will perform the work but for office staff. the rules are therefore perceived as complicated or impossible to follow he says.
 it also becomes apparent that there is quite a lot of knowledge of safety rules but not so much knowledge of laws and regulations.
 for example many lack knowledge of work environment and electrical safety legislation and future officers receive insufficient or no training on these issues despite the fact that they are going to lead operations and be managers.
 safety and learning in connection with exercises
 safety work during exercises also emerged as an interesting area to explore further during work with the thesis.
 many people i interviewed talked about the daytoday and the mission but exercises were perceived as something inbetween.
 i have tried to distance myself from the operations in order to be able to examine them critically both through shadowing and participatory observations. i have looked at how work in the field is done and followed both planning and actual implementation.
 one of the articles in the thesis is linked to learning during exercises and shows how the drive to win affects the ability to work safely.
 safety rules are perceived as obstructive and many people are prepared to violate safety regulations in order to gain advantages and achieve success. performing during exercises is considered important and since the results are central it controls peoples behaviour.
 people learn wrong
 martin schüler also points out that the fact that the swedish armed forces prioritise doing over thinking encourages competitiveness and has a negative effect on the learning element in connection with exercises which is not taken advantage of.
 people dont see exercises as a learning opportunity but more as a competition but its really an educational situation. the exercises should instead be designed for learning with time for reflection otherwise learning is lost.
 if you take it to the extreme you could say that it may even be that people learn to perform tasks incorrectly. if you do not reflect on learning but continue to do things in the same way you do not know what what you have done is worth or even if it is correct.
 a twosided exercise is something that is prepared months in advance but it becomes something of a paradox as you cannot predict what will happen in a war.
 the swedish armed forces should have more exercises that are not preplanned and approach exercises that could provide actual learning.
 martin schüler points to some factors that are important when designing exercises so that they become more unprepared and lifelike and that it would be beneficial to include in exercises so that they become more unfair. it is about things needing to happen outside the exercise area that the units get tips from the coach that suddenly change the scenario that units get access to equipment that they shouldnt really have and that the exercise leader intervenes to create something unexpected.
 i would like to be involved in developing a method that can improve and take advantage of the learning that takes place in exercise situations to strengthen the connection between theory and practice.
 publication
 to the thesis safety climate in a military organization
 martin schüler doctoral student of workintegrated learning at university west martin.schuler@hv.se 0709 72 85 29
 text josefin svensson swedish defence universityanna hallberg university west
 new trio version
 our telephony system trio has been upgraded to a newer version. this means that the references made from and including 19 sep to 29 sep have not been carried over to the new version. those of you who have referred within this period therefore need to go in and recreate those referrals again. if you get the error 404  file or directory not found enter trio.hv.se only and press enter in the browser.
 new way to apply for credit transfer at
 as a student at university west you have the right to apply for getting a previous education or professional activity credited. if you have previously completed courses from university west or other higher education institutions that you want to include in your program or degree you can apply for getting them credited.
 we are now changing the application procedure by digitizing the application process. so far an application for credit has been made on a special form but as of january 1 2022 all applications for credit are made directly in ladok for students. our hope is that this will facilitate management for both students and degree administrators at university west.
 at university west  credit transfer you can read more about credit transfer and how to apply.
 new welding expertise encouraged us to invest in a new factory
 a new assignment allocated to fredriksons verkstads ab involved a number of welding challenges.
 a good partnership with university west and suppliers meant that we could focus on the right welding technology and ventured to invest in new equipment and a new factory says linus elf production technical manager at fredriksons.
 fredriksons in vadstena an industrial enterprise more than 100 years old has plenty of experience of designing and manufacturing large complex products made of stainless steel. production of large tanks for the food industry is one of their specialities. however completely new challenges and opportunities presented themselves when a client asked for the companys help with manufacturing a new type of product.
 the assignment involves a large tank used for longterm storage of energy from wind turbines and solar panels for example. the tank acts as an advanced heat exchanger and has been designed by an innovative company says linus.
 stringent demands on the welds
 the three of them  fredriksons svetsmaskinservice and university west  went on to establish a partnership to explore whether force tig welding technology met the requirements. when linus and his colleagues had mastered the technique they then conducted tests using the same material as that used in the tanks.
 welding tests at production technology centre
 we concluded that force tig is a robust fast and energyefficient welding technology resulting in highquality welds for this type of product. having such substantial decision data meant that we were confident in our choice of welding technology and could take on the new assignment with confidence says linus.
 new factory in vadstena
 manufacturing the new energy storage tank required not only new welding equipment but investment in a new modern production unit as well. the company decided to build a factory in vadstena covering an area of 700 m2 to accommodate a new tank production line. the manufacturing process here is almost fully automated. robots do 95 per cent of the welding and assembly work while the remaining steps and tasks are done manually.
 we opened the factory in february and production is up and running. but were still in the startup phase and are constantly fine tuning everything says reine eriksson key account manager at fredriksons.
 this has been an extensive project and weve learned a lot along the way. this initiative is fully in line with the companys aim of working in partnership with companies and products that address climate challenges with sustainable technology solutions. we have development and manufacturing facilities in both sweden and china so we can also contribute internationally in this area.
 the energy storage tank is a couple of metres high and about the same width and requires about 40 metres of welded joint.
 a spectacular presentation was held for the new energy storage tank when fredriksons verkstads ab inaugurated its new factory in vadstena in february 2022.
 about the collaboration
 university wests collaboration with fredriksons verkstads ab is a good example of how the test bed at the production technology centre ptc in trollhättan can be used by small mediumsized and regional enterprises to build expertise in production technology.
 university west has been funded for several years by the swedish agency for economic and regional growth and region västra götaland in order to develop the production technology centre in trollhättan into a knowledge node and test bed for specific manufacturing processes and automation.
 two new honorary doctors
 mathias lundin ceo of svetskommissionen and stephen billett professor of adult and vocational education griffith university australia have been appointed honorary doctorates at university west. honorary doctors are appointed to honor individuals who have made contr...
 small and large industrial companies have challenges in the ongoing major technological transition. when industrial robots and operators are to collaborate in new ways the human perspective needs to be included from the start. eight manufacturing companies are particip...
 when the covid19 pandemic swept across the world many things came to a halt. among those affected were the tourism and hospitality industries which had to cancel and adapt their operations. university west has been a part of the uprest project investigating how the ...
 during covid19 swedens ability to manage crises and production planning in healthcare came into focus. neither regional management nor hospital directors had any experience with a pandemic. ritva rosenbäck in her doctoral thesis capacity management in swedish hospi...
 the aviation industry is working intensively to reduce the environmental impact of flying and additive manufacturing am is a key enabler in this effort. however for the technology to meet the industrys extremely high safety and quality standards a thorough underst...
 support throughout the educational initiative is crucial for learning
 for learning among professionals in healthcare and care services to have the effect that a workintegrated educational initiative aims for several factors need to interact. the individuals learning process how the education is designed and the support provided by th...
 over the past 20 years most indoor work spaces have transitioned from individual offices where one could close the door to open work spaces where many share the same space. a new doctoral thesis from the university west examines whether the increasingly poor sound env...
 how did swedish upper secondary mathematics teachers navigate the challenges that arose when programming was to be integrated into mathematics education? ana fuentes at university west delves into this question presenting her findings in a new thesis. she explores the ...
 additive manufacturing is a highly interesting technology for industries striving towards more sustainable production says robert pederson prof...
 news articles about iail
 prodex courses are invaluable for scanias technology transition
 like many other industrial companies truck manufacturer scania is preparing for more digitalized production. robert hjelm is one of several employees who has expanded his skillset with a combination of prodex and other training programmes. im very satisfied both with the courses and the new assignments i now have at work says robert.
 as interest in building with wood sees strong growth the wood construction industry seeks new more efficient production methods and logistics flows.
 digitalisation is increasingly present in our working lives and we rely on machines and artificial intelligence more and more. at the same time people risk losing their unique ability to discern nuances and perform informed evaluations. our professional judgement can be eroded in the long term says anders sandblad the worlds first doctor of work integrated learning at university west.
 what happens to people who work in constant change? when there are constantly new digital tools and new rules that require new skills and new working methods? i have looked at professions in communication and automotive development both of which are characterised by digital transformation says charlotte arghavan shahlaei recent phd in informatics at university west.
 a demo exam is now being launched in inspera to reduce students stress before digital exams while a new exam hall is being constructed and pilot projects are underway to broaden and improve the digital examination opportunities.
 a demo exam is now being introduced in inspera where students have the opportunity to test the student view and familiarize themselves with the system before real exam occasions. this initiative aims to reduce stress and uncertainty before digital examinations. teachers can also test the demo exam to familiarize themselves with the student view and see some of the possibilities offered in the system.
 parallel to this the university is preparing to start the renovation of a new exam hall with 95 seats in building b on floor 3. this effort is part of expanding and improving the digital examination opportunities for students. in total the project will deliver 140 digital writing places and 15 places for students with special educational support.
 during the autumn pilot exams are ongoing at various departments. the project group has now together with teachers started to look at the possibilities of allowing a website to be accessed during the ongoing exam in the lockeddown exam setting. this will be evaluated and recommendations will be made. the project group has also initiated a dialogue with the västervik campus to see if and how we can solve digital hall exams under similar conditions also for students in västervik.
 read more about the project digital examination.
 now it is possible for students to make anonymous posts in discussions. should the students be able to make anonymous posts in a discussion? it is up to you as a teacher to decide.
 this is how you do it
 you will find the setting just below the box where you as a teacher can make a starting post in a discussion. there are three possible choices
 by student names and profile pictures will be visible to other course members. this is the default setting.
 partial students can choose whether to show their name and profile picture
 full student names and profile pictures are hidden
 choose what you think is appropriate for the purpose of the discussion.
 the like function
 the like function can be used to let students vote on different posts like in my example those who have the same question that has already been asked can click like on it. you will find the like function just below the settings for anonymity. so far the like function is always anonymous but requests for teachers to be able to see who has liked have been raised in canvas user groups.
 once students start writing in the discussion it is not possible to change the settings for anonymity.
 with default discussion settings only teachers can start an anonymous discussion. as a teacher in the course you can allow students to start anonymous discussions as well. we do not recommend that you allow it.
 the setting is made for one discussion at a time. it is meant to be a conscious choice.
 only students can be anonymous. when a teacher writes in a discussion the name and profile picture will always be visible regardless of the settings of the discussion.
 anonymous discussions cannot be set as group discussions or as moderated discussions.
 anonymous discussions are really anonymous. there is no way that you or your students can find out who wrote a particular post. main canvas administrators can do this but it is a timeconsuming process and should only be done in extreme cases.
 these tips are taken from lotsamig under a creative commons license  attribution.
 the function assign to in modules gives you the opportunity to build courses that are clearer for the students.
 heres how it works
 when you assign a module to certain students that module and its entire content will become invisible to all other students in the course. if there are discussions assignments or quizzes in the module they are automatically assigned to the selected students. apart from the fact that they become completely invisible to the students who are not affected and they avoid being reminded of tasks they are not expected to do.
 select assign to .
 select assign to in the side menu that opens and enter the students who should have access to the module.
 save at the bottom.
 materials that are for everyone  just do as usual
 you put material that all students must see in a module just as usual without using the assign to function. published modules are as before available to all students as long as no restrictions have been set.
 small pitfalls to be aware of
 files do not have an assign to feature. this means that files you upload to your module will certainly be invisible to other students in the module itself it is invisible in its entirety. however they become visible under files . one way to solve it is to paste the text on a page. another option is to use the only available via link publishing setting for the file.
 the submission date may need to be revised if the same task is published in several modules. enter the task as a teacher and click the assign to button in the task and you will get a clear overview of how it is set up. adjust and save if necessary. watch video explaining the assign to function in task .
 showing as a student will not help you. the function show as student formerly students view is great for making a final check so that material is set correctly. the problem is that with visa as a student you become an anonymous student so the module becomes invisible to you. therefore be careful to review settings for any submission tasks.
 these tips come from lotsa mig under a creative commons licence  attribution.
 sometimes it is clearer to show than to write. a new feature in speedgrader allows you to record your screen as a movie
 good to know before you start
 the instructional video was recorded when the feature was brand new. it worked a little differently in different browsers and in safari for mac we unfortunately couldnt get it to work at all. hopefully its a childhood illness but we still want to encourage you to do some test recordings before you start recording for real.
 this is how we do it
 enter speedgrader for an assignment. far down below the comments box youll find a button for the recording function. there are four things you need to set up
 webcam  choose to enable or disable it.
 microphone  choose the best microphone you have access to. the sound is important
 screen recording  choose to enable it.
 what to record  select the tab for the work you have open in speedgrader. tip you will find it easier if you have very few tabs open. then you dont get much to choose from.
 once all the settings are done just click to start recording. you can use the canvas feature to highlight or draw in the document while recording.
 after the recording
 it is wise to watch the recording in the preview window that opens. after that the recording will be converted and it may take a while before it can be viewed again. since the students are not used to the function it is wise to make a short text comment and tell them that comments are in the movie.
 a good screen recording requires preparation on your part so that you can effectively and clearly comment on what needs to be commented. for example you can color mark things that you plan to talk about during the recording.
 since it takes time it is also important to think about whether the recording has something to add to the students learning. perhaps it is more effective with written comments.
 these tips are taken from lotsamig under a creative commons license  attribution..
 whats so smart about it?
 preview of the function
 the video shows that the function needs to be activated in each course. university west has chosen to set this function as the default in every course. teachers have the option to hide the function from the course navigation if they wish.
 these tips come from lotsa mig under a creative commons license  attribution.
 here you find the newsletter concerning sicomap. take a look or subscribe below
 interested in receiving our newsletter?please contact victoria.sjostedt@hv.se
 as of fall 2024 university west has access to the features interactive videoaudio interactive document and peer review via the tool feedbackfruits.
 take the opportunity to enjoy a podcast in the hammock with entertaining and educational listening.
 canvas has long been working on a replacement for the quiz tool in canvas. the new tool is called new quizzes and the old ones are now referred to as classic quizzes. no date has been set for when classic quizzes will be discontinued. you will primarily see the change ...
 the swedish council for higher education uhr highlights collaborative learning si in its latest update of the swedishenglish glossary. but what does si and collaborative learning mean really?
 new user role  examinator examiner to facilitate for students and to clarify responsibilities the examiner role has been created. the examiner role is based on the course leader role and has similar permissions. if the course leader and examiner roles are held by th...
 previous newsletters
 newsletter 28 march 2024
 newsletter 18 march 2024
 newsletter 11 march 2024
 newsletter 4 march 2024
 newsletter 5 february 2024
 newsletter 18 january 2024
 newsletter october 23 2023
 newsletter october 9 2023
 newsletter february 20 2023
 newsletter february 3 2023
 newsletter january 18 2023
 subscribe to our newsletter or read our previous newsletters.
 see our previous newsletters
 20211220 academic teaching padlet and links
 nova  a newsletter about stars eu
 march
 news_feedbackfruits
 with the new peer review feature you can conduct peer reviews within groups and set clear deadlines for each step.
 interactive videodocuments encourage reflection and discussion among students around the material.
 these functions are now integrated into all canvas courses.
 if you want to learn more sign up for one of our workshop sessions this workshops are in swedish. we have workshops on demand in english please contact akademus@hv.se
 the goal for the project is development of high lifetime sps tbcs by design of a coating system with appropriate bondcoat and substrate material and interface topography as well as optimised microstructural features in the topcoat.
 performance of atmospheric plasmasprayed thermal barrier coatings on additively manufactured super alloy substrates
 characteristics and performance of suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings on additively manufactured superalloy substrates
 thermal swing evaluation of thermal spray coatings for internal combustion engines
 tailoring microstructure of doublelayered thermal barrier coatings deposited by suspension plasma spray for enhanced durability
 new generation ceramic coatings for hightemperature applications by liquid feedstock plasma spraying  defense security aerospace and energy applications
 advances in corrosionresistant thermal spray coatings for renewable energy power plants  part ii  effect of environment and outlook
 suspension plasmasprayed thermal barrier coatings for lightduty diesel engines
 effect of ysz thickness on the thermal cyclic fatigue performance of gadolinium zirconateysz double layered tbcs
 measurements of elastic modulus and fracture toughness of an air plasma sprayed thermal barrier coating using microcantilever bending
 determination of local residual stress in an air plasma spray thermal barrier coating apstbc by microscale ring coring using a picosecond laser
 xun zhang chun li philip j. withers nicolaie markocsan ping xiao
 influence of ysz layer thickness on the durability of gadolinium zirconateysz doublelayered thermal barrier coatings produced by suspension plasma spray
 effect of water vapor on the oxidation behavior of hvafsprayed nicr and nicraly coatings
 experimental visualization of microstructure evolution during suspension plasma spraying of thermal barrier coatings
 ashish ganvir rosa filomena calinas nicolaie markocsan nicholas curry shrikant v. joshi
 influence of kcl and hcl on high temperature corrosion of hvafsprayed nicraly and nicrmo coatings
 kclinduced high temperature corrosion behavior of hvafsprayed nibased coatings in ambient air
 erratum to the 2016 thermal spray roadmap
 armelle vardelle christian moreau jun akedo hossein ashrafizadeh christopher c. berndt jörg oberste berghaus maher boulos jeffrey brogan athanasios c. bourtsalas ali dolatabadi mitchell dorfman timothy j. eden pierre fauchais gary fisher frank gaertner malko gindrat rudolf henne margaret hyland eric irissou bertrand jodoin eric h. jordan khiam aik khor andreas killinger yukchiu lau changjiu li li li jon longtin nicolaie markocsan patrick j. masset jiri matejicek georg mauer andré mcdonald javad mostaghimi sanjay sampath günter schiller kentaro shinoda mark f. smith asif ansar syed nickolas j. themelis filofteialaura toma juan pablo trelles robert vassen petri vuoristo
 electrochemical behavior of bilayer thermalspray coatings in lowtemperature corrosion protection
 engineered architectures of gadolinium zirconate based thermal barrier coatings subjected to hot corrosion test
 process parameter impact on axial plasma sprayed ytterbium disilicate coatings for environment barrier coating applications
 influence of graphene nanoplatelets on the performance of axial suspension plasmasprayed hydroxyapatite coatings.
 deposition of hydroxyapatite coatings by axial plasma spraying  influence of feedstock characteristics on coating microstructure phase content and mechanical properties
 thermal barrier coatings with novel architectures for diesel engine applications
 advances in corrosionresistant thermal spray coatings for renewable energy power plants. part i  effect of composition and microstructure
 surface characteristics investigation of hvaf sprayed cermet coatings
 sudarshan vijay litian wang christophe lyphout per nylén nicolaie markocsan
 durability of gadolinium zirconateysz doublelayered thermal barrier coatings under different thermal cyclic test conditions
 understanding the effect of material composition and microstructural design on the erosion behavior of plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings
 effects of surface finish on the initial oxidation of hvafsprayed nicocraly coatings
 axial suspension plasma spraying  an ultimate technique to tailor ti6al4v surface with hap for orthopaedic applications
 pearlin hameed vasanth gopal stefan björklund ashish ganvir dwaipayan sen nicolaie markocsan geetha manivasagam
 tailored microstructures of gadolinium zirconateysz multilayered thermal barrier coatings produced by suspension plasma spray  durability and erosion testing
 satyapal mahade dapeng zhou nicholas curry nicolaie markocsan per nylén robert vassen
 effect of sio2 dispersion on chlorineinduced hightemperature corrosion of highvelocity airfuel sprayed nicrmo coating
 tailoring columnar microstructure of axial suspension plasma sprayed tbcs for superior thermal shock performance
 corrosion behavior of hvafsprayed bilayer coatings  effect of intermediate layers microstructure and chemical composition
 chlorineinduced high temperature corrosion of hvafsprayed nibased alumina and chromia forming coatings
 high temperature corrosion of hvafsprayed nicraly coating exposed to various corrosive environments
 engineered thermal barrier coatings deposited by suspension plasma spray
 satyapal mahade nicholas curry stefan björklund nicolaie markocsan per nylén
 erosion performance of gadolinium zirconatebased thermal barrier coatings processed by suspension plasma spray
 functional performance of gd2zr2o7ysz multilayered thermal barrier coatings deposited by suspension plasma spray
 staff member at department of engineering science.
 i work as a lecturer in applied mathematics at university west since 2003. i teach mathematics courses in our engineering programs and in our technical preparatory year.
 nomination of student
 nomination of exchange student
 partner universities of university west nominate exchange students for studies below.
 please note that we apply this online nomination only and will not process nominations sent by email.
 nominations must be in accordance with exchange agreement. university west may refuse applications from students who do not comply with this. in case of uncertainities please contact us at international@hv.se prior to submitting nomination.
 an email containing information on how to apply for studies will be sent to the email addresses submitted in the nomination form.
 to nominate the student please click on this link.
 nondestructive evaluation  of concrete constructions
 this project aims to develop a new method for nondestructive testing of concrete structures based on mechanical wave propagation. the result may among other things lead to the use of existing building and construction structures in concrete being optimized.
 a critical factor in societys transition towards reduced environmental impact and sustainable development is to optimize the utilization of existing civil engineering constructions. a key component in this work is nondestructive evaluation nde which means that constructions can be examined without being damaged.
 this project aims to develop a new method for nondestructive evaluation of concrete structures based on mechanical wave propagation. the projects results are expected to contribute to several significant advances in the development of a new method for an almost complete evaluation of thick  0.5 m and heavily reinforced concrete structures.
 this is considered to promote both the societys and the constructions industrys work in condition assessment as well as quality control. this is important in the work to reduce environmental impact and from the perspective of sustainable development.
 the course will address nondestructive evaluation nde with a focus on applications within the manufacturing industry. the applications addressed will mostly focus on inspection of weldments and additively manufactured metal parts. after completing the course a student is expected to be able to describe methods and procedures for common nondestructive evaluation. the understanding should be at such a level that the student can select and describe limitations of these methods and procedures as well as perform laboratory nde in the form of experiments and simulations and interpret the results.
 bachelor of science degree in materials science and engineering mechanical engineering chemical engineering manufacturing engineering production technology or equivalent. in addition at least 15 he credits in mathematics and english benglish 6 or equivalent are required.
 in the nondestructive testing lab a wide range of analysis techniques are available. they are used to test the properties of materials and components.
 ultrasound
 infrared camerathe camera can for example show how heat spreads in components during welding.
 magnetic particle testingwith an electromagnetic yoke and magnetic powder it is possible to find small cracks and defects in components. the magnetic powder cumulates in the defects because of a magnetic concentration. it is possible to find cracks and defects below the surface.
 eddy current testingeddy current inspection uses the principal of electromagnetism as the basis for conducting examinations. eddy currents are induced electrical currents that flow in circular paths. they can be used to detect cracks and defects in for example weld joints.
 optical 3d deformation analysisthe system measures threedimensional deformation and strain in components and material. painted spots on a component are depicted before and after heating or before and after the component has been subjected to a load of some kind. the spots will move and this makes it possible to calculate deformation.
 professor of medical science psychiatry
 i have over 30 years of experience as a university teacher in an extensive international context and over 20 years of experience as a university lecturer and supervisor of c dessays and doctoral dissertations. the subjects i have taught are mainly biological and medical subjects such as neurobiology cell biology physiology histology adult and child psychiatry as well as scientific theory and methodology. in 2018 i founded and lead an independent advancedlevel course on acupuncture in the care of people with mental health and psychiatric conditions.
 health science integrated care complementary medicine mental healthillness social psychiatry substance use yoga traumaadjusted yoga tay transdiagnostic psychiatry.
 refereereviewed articles linked to the above projects
 for further publications see the diva database.
 first evidence on a general disease d factor underlying psychopathology and physical illness in adolescents
 prevalence of chronic pain in children and adolescents with psychiatric conditions.
 gender nonbinary adolescents somatic and mental health throughout 2020.
 the associations between adhd pain inflammation and quality of life in children and adolescentsa clinical study protocol.
 mental health profiles in a sample of moroccan high school students  comparison before and during the covid19 pandemic
 psychological distress somatic complaints and their relation to negative psychosocial factors in a sample of swedish high school students
 changes in adolescents psychosocial functioning and wellbeing as a consequence of longterm covid19 restrictions
 psychological distress in a sample of moroccan prisoners with drugdependence
 mental health profile and its relation with parental alcohol use problems andor the experience of abuse in a sample of moroccan high school students  an explorative study
 imprisoning yoga  yoga practice may increase the character maturity of male prison inmates.
 selfreported aggressive and antisocial behaviors in moroccan high school students
 risk and protective factors for drug dependence in two moroccan highrisk male populations
 correction to  physical health in children with neurodevelopmental disorders.
 yoga practice reduces the psychological distress levels of prison inmates
 the prison adjusted measure of aggression pama  psychometric characteristics of a new tool measuring change in aggressive behaviors in correctional settings
 mechanisms of pain hypersensitivity in a pharmacological mouse model of attentiondeficithyperactivity disorder
 m. landry o. bouchatta s. b. mhamed r. boualibenazzouz nora kerekes p. fossat m. bennis
 the protective effect of character maturity in child aggressive antisocial behavior
 personality and trait aggression profiles of male and female prison inmates
 aggressive antisocial behaviors are related to character maturity in young swedish violent offenders independent of adhd
 partnership interacts with the association between leisuretime physical activity and positive affect
 the genetic and environmental structure of the character subscales of the temperament and character inventory in adolescence.
 thought and moodarousal disturbances as central broad dimensions in youth psychopathology  a network analysis
 psychometric properties of update arabic version of the trait hope scale and the rosenberg selfesteem scale
 the association between pain and psychiatric conditions in adolescents  the impact of gender and adhd diagnosis
 targeting neuroinflammation with abscisic acid reduces pain sensitivity in females and hyperactivity in males of an adhd mice model
 swedish high school students drug and alcohol use habits throughout 2020
 the covid19 pandemic and adolescents psychological distress  a multinational crosssectional study
 measurement properties of the life history of aggression in adolescents  data from morocco serbia sweden vietnam and the usa.
 neuroinflammation as a possible link between attentiondeficithyperactivity disorder adhd and pain
 yoga as complementary care for young people placed in juvenile institutions  a study plan
 conduct disorder and somatic health in children  a nationwide genetically sensitive study
 prison adjusted measure of aggression pama
 somatic health and its association with negative psychosocial factors in a sample of moroccan adolescents
 evaluation of an integrated intensive cognitive behavioral therapy treatment within addiction care
 neonatal 6ohda lesion model in mouse induces attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder adhdlike behaviour
 otmane bouchatta houria manouze rabia boualibenazzouz nora kerekes saadia bamhamed pascal fossat marc landry mohamed bennis
 physical health in children with neurodevelopmental disorders
 associations between conduct disorder neurodevelopmental problems and psychopathic personality traits in a swedish twin youth population
 yoga in correctional settings  a randomized controlled study
 the coexistence of psychiatric and gastrointestinal problems in children with restrictive eating in a nationwide swedish twin study
 psychometric properties of the arabic version of the drug use disorders identification test dudit in clinical prison inmate and student samples
 antisocial behavior and polymorphisms in the oxytocin receptor gene  findings in two independent samples
 acute and chronic glue sniffing effects and consequences of withdrawal on aggressive behavior
 nordic conference on phd supervision cophs
 cophs information.pdf
 nordic iscar2025
 welcome to next years nordic iscar at university west 1012 june 2025
 the ambition of the nordic iscar conference is to reframe the roots of working and learning to make them simultaneously relevant in the context of the current global challenges. in this spirit the conference will offer a forum for further development and productive discussion on principles and applications of the fourth generation of chat.
 we will update this website with more information and eventually the program of the conference. the most important thing now is to save the date. we are looking forward to seeing you in trollhättan sweden from 10th to 12th of june 2025.
 warmly welcome
 links to previous conferences
 previous iscar conference 2024
 previous nordic iscar conference 2019
 university west campus trollhättan
 watch film
 in health care and social services
 university college of northern denmark hjörring denmark
 why take this course?
 are you interested in getting to know more about norm  consciousness?
 in this course you will get an introduction. we will discuss subjects like equal treatment social justice the creation of more equal relationships and the power structure that may exist between care providers and clientspatients. you will have the opportunity to develop your skills with different methods that promote equal treatment.we will discuss norms and values that contribute to our identity group affiliation and perceptions of normality.
 would you like to meet students from other nordic countries and discuss get inspired and learn more about normconsciousness? apply to this course
 who can take this course?
 the course is aimed at students from partner universities in norway denmark finland lithuania and sweden who are part of the nordplus cooperation.
 you need to have basic competence and 60 ects within the main area of nursing or equivalent to join the course. you also need to understand and make yourself understood in english.
 what to do
 contact your universities international coordinator. write a short motivation letter and explain why you would like to take part in this course. justify how the subject can have significance for your studies and your future profession.
 information to attach to the application day of birth first name second name sex and university.
 apply latest 13 2024 to your international coordinator.
 credits
 it presupposes preparatory work corresponding to 1 ½ ects before the course begins in june 2024. the course will give you 3 ects after completing the course and passing the grade.
 identify analyze and argue for the importance of a
 normconscious approach in health and social care.
 describe and explain the scientific basis of existing socialhierarchy power structures and intersectionality competence and skills.
 apply knowledge of social categories in health and social care
 identify and justify the importance of equal and unequal structures at different levels in health and social care
 reflect on and critically evaluate a professional approach to norms.
 reflect on and critically evaluate norms in relation to health and social care.
 novel thermal spray coatings for increased thermal efficiency of diesel engines
 depleting fossil fuel resources economic competitiveness and environmental concerns have compelled to explore new avenues to improve efficiency of automotive engines.
 a possible solution to address this challenge is to insulate the engines hot parts with protective coatings. the projects major aim is to develop protective coatings that provide high thermal efficiency and longlife time in diesel engines this will be achieved by designing thermal spray coating with appropriate morphology microstructure and thickness as well as material composition.
 new technical solutions to be approached are multilayer coating system as well as suspension plasma spraying which enables nanocrystalline layers with new morphology that gives enhanced functional properties.the project will be coordinated by univ. west and the industrial partners are scania volvo trucks and volvo cars who will both participate to coating development and will be the direct beneficiary of the project results.
 for nozinhle working life is a natural part of her education
 nozinhle primrose khumalo from zimbabwe is an international student studying masters in robotics and automation. before she started her studies at university west she worked in the manufacturing industry and since nozinhle started her studies in august the courses have all been a mixture of theory lectures and practical work.
 the main reason nozinhle chose to study in sweden was due to the countrys innovation and the fact that it is technologically advanced. she felt that this would be a suitable environment for her to learn and gain practical experience in the engineering field.
 sweden stood out amongst other technologically advanced countries because of its commitment to sustainability which i resonate with and the effort and emphasis that the nation puts in ensuring an equal society for all says nozinhle.
 nozinhle tells us that the differences between zimbabwe and sweden are many. zimbabwe is still a developing country and is yet to get to the technological advancements that sweden currently has.
 im originally from bulawayo which is zimbabwes secondlargest city. i studied for a bachelor of engineering honours degree in electronic engineering at the national university of science and technology. i also played volleyball and was part of the zimbabwe womens senior volleyball team.
 when nozinhle was looking for a program she wanted a program that would help her gain more insight into the technological advancements companies are adopting to improve the productivity and efficiency of their operations.
 that is why i decided to apply for this program at university west says nozinhle.
 a significant part of the credits for each module is obtained through practical assignments which she likes a lot. to nozinhle wil workintegrated learning means having a curriculum whose focus is on equipping students with industryrelevant skills. this means rather than theory the focus is on giving practical knowledge and experience for students to enable them to integrate well into the industry after their studies.
 in my program wil is integrated into education where we get to do both simulation and reallife programming of robots. this is in line with what happens in the industry says nozinhle.
 in 5 years i hope to be working as an automation or robotics engineer gaining technical industry experience to prepare myself for a career in engineering consultancy focusing on using new technologies to achieve more efficient and environmentally sustainable solutions for manufacturing companies concludes nozinhle.
 boka new quizzes workshop på campus eller distans
 nucop  nextgeneration coating platform for environmentfriendly and energyefficient vehicles
 5. skaffa microsoft authenticator
 ny trio version
 nyhet i canvas anonym diskussion
 5 lightboard hybrid seminarieserie och spela in med powerpoint. 20220524
 nyris conferences
 youth moves  voices  spaces  subjectivites
 need certificate for participation at nyris13?
 if you need a certificate for your participation at nyris13 please send us an email to this adress event@hv.se. following information is required
 title of presentation
 we will get back to you with a letter in august 2016.
 oasis  optimisation of friction stir welding fsw and laser beam welding lbw for assembly of structural aircraft parts
 goal  3 and its strategies
 goal 3. we are a regional driving force a national leader and internationally recognised
 in order to succeed in our role we take advantage of our strengths and our unique characteristics. three specific goals help us to stay on track on the journey towards our vision and ultimately to provide added value for society and our stakeholders. these goals have a fiveyear timeframe and apply for the period 20222026.
 we take responsibility for local and regional social development that meets current needs. at the same time we also strive to raise our eyes and act based on national and global perspectives.
 at the same time we also take on board knowledge from others with humility and see mutual collaboration as something that takes place as a matter of course. we are flexible and sensitive in our collaboration but are also professional and a driving force. this is how we help to resolve complex societal challenges. this is how we make a difference as an academic institution.
 in order to achieve these three objectives and fulfil our role effectively for our students our partners and society as a whole we need to focus on several areas. each objective therefore has a number of highlighted strategic initiatives that lay the foundation for succeeding in achieving our vision. these strategies have threeyear timeframes and apply for the period 20222024. both the objectives and the strategies are followed up annually.
 make regional national and international perspectives and cooperation part of our daytoday work.
 the two other objectives
 objective 1. we are brave and help each other to grow
 objective 2. we improve the world every day
 goal 1 and its strategies
 goal 1. we are brave and help each other to grow
 here it is easy to contact each other and there is a natural selfevident openness and proximity between students colleagues and partners. our campus meets our needs as we come together both physically and digitally and facilitates cooperation and creativity. our students influence their own education as a matter of course. our employees have the right conditions to build and take responsibility together for a good working environment and workplace culture. we include everyone and encourage everyone to make a contribution and have an influence. and we ensure that we have fun along the way.
 develop our working method and learn from each other based on the wil perspective.
 develop environments so that students and employees want to be here based on campus plan 2030.
 develop quality leadership and employeeship in order to contribute towards defend and strengthen our unique characteristics and our working climate.
 objective 3. we are a regional driving force a national leader and internationally recognised
 goal 2 and its strategies
 goal 2. we improve the world every day
 in order to succeed in our role we take advantage of our strengths and our unique characteristics. three specific goals help us to stay on track on the journey towards our vision and ultimately to provide added value for society and our stakeholders. these goas have a fiveyear timeframe and apply for the period 20222026.
 we create the right conditions for students to become critically reflective social citizens who learn throughout their lives have the courage to challenge accepted ideas and drive forward change in order to build a society for everyone. we think along new lines to contribute towards a better world. we see the value of each others contributions as we create knowledge together. we always aim to reach a wider audience. we are firmly convinced that a world where more people have access to knowledge and development is a more equal more sustainable world.
 together we make a difference.
 develop interdisciplinary structures for cooperation and collaboration.
 microsoft 365 office email
 office 365 is a web based solution for email and document management as well as teams and sharepoint for collaboration in groups. it is important that you use your student email because you get a lot of the information from university west to this address.
 to log in to microsoft services
 in our microsoft services of which office is a part in addition to login with username and password we also use multifactor authentication mfa. you therefore need to activate mfa. read about mfa and how to activate it here
 the user name in microsoft 365 must be followed by @student.hv.se if you are a student and by @hv.se if you are a staff member. for example abcd1234@student.hv.se or abcdef@hv.se. your password is the same in all our systems.
 to office 365    to the student email
 more about the different parts of office 365
 email and calendar  outlook
 email with an inbox of 50 gb storage per user shared calendars and tools for task management. attach files up to 18 mb.
 each user get their own storage space in microsoft onedrive. click here for more information about onedrive. get started with onedrive.
 office web apps
 create and edit word onenote powerpoint and excel documents from any web browser.
 office 365  proplus free to download
 office software package for download and installation on your personal computer.go to the page about office software for private computer.
 the most common problems when trying to sign in to office 365 are
 you receive error message errorcause you are already logged in to the same service but with a different account such as your personal hotmail account.solution log out of your private live  outlook  hotmail account or use a different web browser for the university email.
 you receive error message there is no such microsoftkonto...that microsoft account does not exist ...cause you are trying to log in with your email address.solution log in with your username@student.hv.se e.g. buba0001@student.hv.se
 you have not activated multifactor authentication mfa see above under the heading to log in to microsoft services.
 your email address is constructed as follows firstname.lastname@student.hv.se. you get an additional number after the name if any other account holder has the same name as you.
 our spam protection spam  undesired email classifies email messages as spam according to certain rules. thereafter some emails will be moved to the junk mail folder depending on which of our spam filters is beeing used. spam will be tagged with either spam or spam in the subjectline. if you despite this receive spam junk mail you handle this on your own see the guide below.
 please note it is important that you check the junk mail folder frequently because email can be incorrectly classified as spam.
 manage spam on your own
 in addition to the central spam filters you can also make personal settings for spam.
 if you want email coming from a specific email address not to end up in junkmail  spam rightclick on the email in the list of emails and select junk never block sender. then emails from this address do not end up in junkmail  spam. the sender address is added to a safe senders list. emails that existed before you made the setting are not affected.
 if you want email that comes from a certain email address to end up in junkmail  spam rightclick on the email in the list of emails and select junk block sender. after selecting this setting emails from this email address will end up directly in the junkmail  spam folder the sender will be added to a blocked sender list. emails that existed before you made the setting are not affected.
 focused inbox
 less important email is automatically moved to a separate tab
 the focused inbox feature in outlook causes less important emails to be sorted out and moved to their own tab automatically. this tab is called other.
 emails that are moved to the othertab are for example emails that you have previously ignored. you can get the system to learn which emails are less important by moving them here manually. your important emails remain in the focused tab.
 please note that important emails may end up in other by mistake. therefore it is important that you sometimes check this tab and move important emails back to focused by rightclicking on the email and chose move.
 you can turn off focused inbox
 if you do not want any email to be moved to other you can turn this feature off. do this
 log into office 365. go to outlook.
 go to settings the cogwheel.
 click the slider at focused inbox.
 you can read more in office 365 help.
 account closing
 one year after your last registration on a course with us your account will be closed. this means that you will no longer be able to access your files email onedrive or microsoft office software if you have installed office 365 proplus with your university west license. remember to copy the data files emails and attachments that you want to save before your account is closed
 here you will find instructions for all the features and settings of email  help.outlook.com
 for information on other services in office 365 please consult support.office.com.for problems with email you can turn to servicecenter.
 microsoft 365 office epost
 office 365  proplus ladda ner gratis
 focused inbox  prioriterad inkorg
 logga in i office 365. gå till outlook.
 office of communications and international relations
 press and media marketing web development student ambassador activities event support.
 communicate and strengthen the universitys brand nationally and internationally
 the department works in teams with the following responsibilities
 web organization
 marketing communication  student recruitment
 event and conference support graphic production eduty printed matter sound moving image
 communication with current students
 press and news
 staff portal internal web
 mobility for students and teachers
 chief communications officer
 staff communications office
 recruiter                        director international affairs
 communications officer                        eventkoordinator
 communications officer                        webbsystemförvaltning och support
 communications officer                        studentrekryterare
 microsoft 365 office
 office software for private computer
 office software for private devices
 microsoft office is free of charge for you as a student or employee at university west
 during your studies and up to one year after the latest registration at university west you have the right to use the software package office 365  proplus on your private computer. the package includes word excel powerpoint onenote access publisher outlook teams and infopath.
 please note that office can be installed on pc and mac but not on google chromebook
 you can install it on 5 private computers and your mobile devices.
 install office on a computer
 follow these steps to install office 365  proplus
 surf to  and log in with your university west email account username and password. ex buba0001@student.hv.se.
 click install office.
 follow the instructions on the screen.
 the first time you start office
 the first time you start office you have to log in.  log in with your username followed by @student.hv.se if you are a student and your username followed by @hv.se if youre staff. this may look like this abcd1234@student.hv.se or abcdef@hv.se. in the password field type your university west password. then you are logged in all office applications.
 configure the outlook client for your email
 after you have installed office 365 you can choose to manage your email in the outlook client. if so you must configure the outlook client as shown below. if you are happy to handle the email only on the web you can skip this.
 launch the outlook application.
 press the button next.
 mark yes and press the button next
 mark email account and enteryour name your name.email address your username not the emailadress for office 365 at university west. e.g. buba0001@student.hv.se.password your password for your office 365 account.press the button next.
 outlook will now configure and a box that asks for username and password will appear. type in your username for office 365 and password the same as the previous step.
 install office on tablet and smartphone
 for ipad and iphone download outlook word excel and powerpoint as standalone apps in the appstore.
 for android tablets and smartphone download outlook word excel and powerpoint as standalone apps in google play.
 log in to your apps
 after you have installed outlook and other officeapps you log in to the apps with your username followed by @student.hv.se if you are a student and with your username followed by@hv.se if you are staff. this may look like this abcd1234@student.hv.se or abcdef@hv.se. in the password field type your university west password.
 where can i get help with office 365?
 please note that the universitys staff does not support private equipment
 in addition to examining the positive impact of digital technology on teaching i am also investigating the challenges it can introduce. furthermore i am exploring the cases where personal presence and physical space are essential for teaching despite the increased use of technology.
 olkc conference overviewregistration olkc paper submissionimportant datesprogram  keynote speakers practical information
 olkc conference 2022
 welcome to the organisational learning knowledge and capabilities olkc conference 2022  79 september in trollhättan sweden. this years overall theme is learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability.
 make sure you are on time at the room of your paper session.
 a session chair is appointed to keep the session arrangement.
 you can use your own computer or ask for uploading your presentation file on the session chairs computer in powerpoint of pdf format.
 spend at maximum 15 mins for presentation and leave 10 mins for discussion.
 programs papers and details are accessed via the sharepoint online invitation you have received via email.overview versions of the conference program and evening events can be found here. looking forward to see you next week in trollhättanwarmly welcomeolkc 2022 organizing committee
 the registration for the confernce is now closed. if you have any questions regarding the registration process dont hesitate to contact us at olkc2022@hv.se
 have you registered to the conference and are now looking for information about how to get to university west and accommodation?click this link to get to our costumbuild conference page where you will find information and discount codes for accommodation.  visit trollhättan vänersborg
 april 19. 2022  deadline to submit abstracts to general and thematic tracks
 june 19. 2022  notification of acceptance
 august 14. 2022  deadline to submit full papers
 september 7  9. 2022  conference
 in line with the olkc theme learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability the conference presents different tracks one general track three thematic tracks as well as a doctoral students day.
 contact information
 for general inquires about the conference please do not hesitate to contact us at olkc2022@hv.se and we will do our very best to help you out
 the general track
 the general track invites submissions broadly concerned with questions of organizational learning knowledge innovation and the capabilities that organizations foster or require for approaching these. learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability is the general track of olkc 2022  covering diverse practices organizations people and disciplines.
 learning how to thrive in the new landscape of work and professional contexts where digitalization and sustainability are two main driving challenges for contemporary organizations becomes vital. to create conditions and opportunities for innovative approaches of integrating learning aspects in work contexts nowadays also needs to be set in the perspective of sustainability in all three dimensions e.g. ecologic economic and social sustainability. organizations ability to support a sustainable development of both human and technical capabilities will be the outstanding success. how values and efforts regarding employees learning capabilities are taken into account when designing and managing the organizations financial and technical resources will be of special interest. the newly reported un report in may 2021 tells us that it is not too late to make a difference. it calls for a transformative change a fundamental systemwide reorganization across technological economic and social factors including paradigms goals and values but only if we start now at every level from local to global ipbes chair sir robert watson.
 knowledge learning and continuous development of workforce competencies are of vital importance for a sustainable society. this implies not only knowledge management together with a critical reflection in action but also commitment and participation in crosssector and interorganizational actions. a constantly changing society requires organizations to explore and implement new ways of learning and working. for example demographic development is a major challenge for the healthcare sector and the artificial technologies are posing challenges for human empowerment and judgement in the industrial sector and in the society as a whole.
 organizations face complex problems that require new information knowledge and competences to make informed decisions where the outcomes are not known in advance. to support this organizations are increasingly governed by means of technology or other types of digital infrastructures or algorithmic logics. people in organizations are constantly confronted with new and different challenges requiring learning of new practices adaption of new strategies and technologies but also a readiness to leave behind old ways of organizing and working.
 in order to stay competitive in the third decade of 21st century and to be a pioneer for building future organizational capabilities it requires courage confidence and trust. hence learning is an equally important aspect from a management perspective. managers or owners are also facing the need to critically analyze their existing ways of working and learning and this will require to reskill andor upskill themselves and the workforce through establishing a supportive and sustainable learning environment. to deepen the understanding of why and how the enhancement of learning opportunities and conditions for future work is critical to have the organizational workforce ready for acting competently. hence studies of how approaches to learn about future workforce capabilities can be developed and managed will be welcomed.
 thematic tracks
 thematic tracks invite contributions that focus on a specific aspect within the field of organisational learning to survey and build the community as well as to share latest thinking around questions related to the track. for olkc 2022 we are excited to invite contributions to the following three thematic tracks
 1. perspectives on collaboration for sustainable organizational learningthis thematic track is dedicated to advance current understanding of collaboration organisational learning and sustainability covering diverse practices organisations people and disciplines.  there is a continuous need for organisational learning innovation and development in response to contemporary societal challenges on local regional national and global scales in the digital era. to deal with complex issues learning and collaboration are vital in all sectors of society in order to include various perspectives and competences across organisational borders bernhard  olsson 2020.
 collaboration for organizational learning may be based on inclusion of employees internal and external stakeholders a learning climate trust transparency systematic employee development and encouragement for constant experimentation and learning battistella et. al. 2021 bernhard  wihlborg 2021 olsson et.al. 2021. inclusion for organisational learning is here argued to be in line with the intentions for social sustainability united nations 2021.
 the thematic track is chaired by assistant professor iréne bernhard and associate professor anna karin olsson university west sweden.
 bernhard i.  wihlborg e. 2021 bringing all clients into the rpa system  professional digital discretion to enhance inclusion when services are automated information polity. vol. prepress no. prepress pp. 117
 bernhard i.  olsson a. k. 2020. universityindustry collaboration in higher education exploring the informing flows framework in industrial phd education. informing science the international journal of an emerging transdiscipline vol. 23 pp. 147163.
 islind a.s.  norström l. 2020 learning sustainable work through critical design a case study of a hackathon to prepare the future workforce journal of workplace learning vol. 32 no. 8 pp. 641651.
 rampersad g.c. 2015 developing universitybusiness cooperation through workintegrated learning international journal of technology management vol. 68 nos 34 pp. 203227.
 trencher g. p. yarime m.  kharrazi a. 2013. cocreating sustainability crosssector university collaborations for driving sustainable urban transformations. journal of cleaner production vol. 50 4055.
 united nations 2021. the 17 goals
 örtenblad a. 2018 what does learning organization mean? the learning organization vol. 25 no. 3 pp. 150158.
 2. collaborative approaches to workintegrated learning this track is about workintegrated learning wil which can be seen as a collective concept encapsulating a variety of different approaches in understanding learning. theoretical and practical knowledge and experiences are integrated and linked in workplaces as well as in educational contexts billett 2009. as working life has become increasingly complex everchanging and unpredictable workers face new and growing demands to engage in continuous learning training activities and formal education. this development is reflected in a renewed academic interest and learning at work.
 the thematic track is chaired by professor lars walter associate professor maria spante and professor ann svensson university west sweden.
 referencesbillett s. 2009. realising the educational worth of integrating work experiences in higher education studies in higher education vol. 34 no. 7 pp. 827843.
 engeström y. 2020 ascending from the abstract to the concrete as a principle of expansive learning psychological science and education vol. 25 no. 5 pp. 3143.
 gherardi s. 2009. knowing and learning in practicebased studies an introduction. the learning organization vol. 16 no. 5 pp. 352359.
 gjellebæk c. svensson a. fladeby n. bjørkquist c.  grundén k. 2020b. management challenges for the future digitalization of healthcare services futures vol.124 102636.
 nicolini d. 2012. practice theory work and organization an introduction. oup oxford.
 nicolini d. scarbrough h.  gracheva j. 2016. communities of practice and situated learning in health care. in ferlie e. montgomery k. and pedersen a. r. eds. the oxford handbook of health care management. pp. 255278. oxford oxford university press.
 3. learning and organizing for digital transformationin this track we invite empirical and theoretical papers exploring perspectives on learning and organising for digital transformation. the digital transformation demands new qualities and competencies of professionals and changes in norms cultures as well as organisational support and leadership. it forces organisations and management to provide conditions for competence development and learning and this will have fundamental implications in all parts of the working life and society in general billett 2014 vallo hult et al. 2022.
 hence digital transformation calls for new logics of organising and learning. in this track we aim to gain knowledge and understanding about social as well as sociotechnical aspects of work and organising from a variety of views such as practitioners organisations managements individuals and policymakers etc.
 the thematic track is chaired by professor ulrika lundh snis and assistant professor helena vallo hult. university west sweden
 billett s. 2014. mimetic learning in and for work. in mimetic learning at work. pp. 121. springer.
 drechsler k. gregory r. wagner h.t.  tumbas s. 2020. at the crossroads between digital innovation and digital transformation. communications of the association for information systems vol. 47 no. 1 pp. 23.
 jensen t. b. 2018. digital transformation of work. scandinavian journal of information systems vol. 30 no. 2 pp. 2740.
 kallinikos j. aaltonen a.  marton a. 2013. the ambivalent ontology of digital artifacts. mis quarterly vol 37 no 2 pp. 357370.
 lyytinen k. yoo y.  boland jr r. j. 2016. digital product innovation within four classes of innovation networks. information systems journal vol. 26 no. 1 pp. 4775.
 shahlaei c. lundh snis u. 2021. conceptualizing industrial workplace learning journal of workplace learning accepted for publication 2022.
 vallo hult h.  byström k. 2021. challenges to learning and leading the digital workplace. studies in continuing education.
 zuboff s. 1988. in the age of the smart machine the future of work and power. basic books.
 doctoral students day  september 7
 we welcome both quantitative approaches that may include a wellequipped box of quantitative tools and instruments as well as qualitative methodologies that may include casestudy methodologies critical analysis and hermeneutics. all of these can be valid approaches. none of them tells the whole story on their own so we appreciate to have a mix of approaches represented in order to position organisational learning and knowledge capabilities in a holistic relevant and rigorous context.
 senior olkc scholars organising the doctoral students day professor lars svensson university west sweden and professor carsten sørensen london school of economics london great britain
 information about keyimportant dates.
 download the program overview here
 download the evening event program here
 we have invited all delegates to a sharepoint site where all the conference papers and the conference program can be accessed and downloaded.
 for the paper session format we will allocate 25 minutes to each paper of which 15 minutes for presentation and 10 minutes for discussion.
 olkc doctoral day  september 7th
 09.0010.00 welcome and introduction
 10.0012.00 group work session 1
 13.0015.00 group work session 2
 15.0016.00 feedback session  end of day
 18.30 welcome reception at saab car museum
 09.0009.15 welcome to olkc 2022
 10.0010.30 coffee break
 14.3015.00 coffee break
 16.30 end of day
 17.00 evening event and conference dinner
 10.3011.00 coffee break
 11.0012.00 keynote clay spinuzzi
 14.3015.00 conclusions goodbye and the next conference
 tentative title how the implementation of artificial intelligence ai and data analytics influence organizational knowing through processes of reassessment and reconfiguration.
 clay spinuzzi is a professor of rhetoric and writing at the university of texas at austin. he studies how people organize communicate collaborate and innovate at work. spinuzzi has conducted multiple workplace studies resulting in several articles and four books tracing genres through organizations mit press 2003 network cambridge university press 2008 topsight amazon createspace 2013 second edition urso press 2018 and all edge university of chicago press 2015. he blogs at spinuzzi.blogspot.com.
 tentative title sustaining and resonating knowledge integrating embodied narrative and abstractsymbolic representations at work
 välkommen till årets konferens organisational learning knowledge and capabilities olkc 2022  79  september. årets tema är learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability.
 full paper submission date august 14th 2022.
 full paper submission date august 14th 2022. in accordance with the olkc conference practice there are no special guidelines for the paper submission. however we encourage you to consider our special issues in journal of workplace learning and in the learning organization and to prepare your paper according to the guidelines for any of those  or  full paper should be sent by email to olkc2022@hv.se
 submit the paper using the word 2013 version of microsoft or later version. we suggest naming your file presenters name_olkc2022.docx to avoid confusion between papers.
 if you have any queries regarding the olkc please email us on olkc2022@hv.se.
 the overall theme is learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainabilitydate for the conference 79 september
 deadline extension to submit abstracts with deadline 19th of april for abstracts and 25th of april for doctoral students abstracts.
 submission guidelinesextended abstract submission deadline extended deadline to april 19th 2022extended abstract submission deadline for doctoral students day  extended deadline to april 25th 2022
 call for papers  short.pdf
 university west trollhättan sweden.
 read more about the region trollhättan here.
 information how to travel to trollhättan you will find here.
 margunn aanestad professor of information systems at the university of agder norway and an affiliated professor at the department of informatics at the university of oslo norway.
 clay spinuzzi professor of rhetoric and writing at the university of texas at austin us.
 in line with the olkc theme learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability the conference presents different tracks one general track three thematic tracks as well as a doctoral students day.
 the general track invites submissions broadly concerned with questions of organizational learning knowledge innovation and the capabilities that organisations foster or require for approaching these. learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability is the general track of olkc 2022  covering diverse practices organizations people and disciplines.
 learning how to thrive in the new landscape of work and professional contexts where digitalization and sustainability are two main challenges for contemporary organizations becomes vital. to create conditions and opportunities for innovative approaches of integrating learning aspects in work contexts nowadays also needs to be set in the perspective of sustainability in all three dimensions e.g. ecologic economic and social sustainability. organizations ability to support a sustainable development of both human and technical capabilities will be the outstanding success. how values and efforts regarding employees learning capabilities are taken into account when designing and managing the organizations financial and technical resources will be of special interest. the new un report from may 2021 tells us that it is not too late to make a difference. it calls for a transformative change a fundamental systemwide reorganization across technological economic and social factors including paradigms goals and values but only if we start now at every level from local to global ipbes chair sir robert watson.
 knowledge learning and continuous development of workforce competencies are of vital importance for a sustainable society. this implies not only knowledge management together with a critical reflection in action but also commitment and participation in crosssector and interorganisational actions. a constantly changing society requires organizations to explore and implement new ways of learning and working. for example demographic development is a major challenge for the healthcare sector and the artificial technologies are posing challenges for human empowerment and judgement in the industrial sector and in the society as a whole.
 organizations face complex problems that require new information knowledge and competences to make informed decisions where the outcomes are not known in advance. to support this organisations are increasingly governed by means of technology or other types of digital infrastructures or algorithmic logics. people in organisations are constantly confronted with new and different challenges requiring learning of new practices adaption of new strategies and technologies but also a readiness to leave behind old ways of organising and working.
 in order to stay competitive in the third decade of 21st century and to be a pioneer for building future organisational capabilities it requires courage confidence and trust. hence learning is an equally important aspect from a management perspective. managers or owners are also facing the need to critically analyse their existing ways of working and learning and this will require to reskill andor upskill themselves and the workforce through establishing a supportive and sustainable learning environment. to deepen the understanding of why and how the enhancement of learning opportunities and conditions for future work is critical to have the organisational workforce ready for acting competently. hence studies of how approaches to learn about future workforce capabilities can be developed and managed will be welcomed.
 thematic tracks invite contributions that focus on a specific aspect within the field of organisational learning to survey and build the community as well as to share latest thinking around questions related to the track. for olkc 2022 we are excited to invite contributions to the following thematic tracks
 perspectives on collaboration for sustainable organizational learning
 this thematic track is dedicated to advance current understanding of collaboration organisational learning and sustainability covering diverse practices organisations people and disciplines.  there is a continuous need for organisational learning innovation and development in response to contemporary societal challenges on local regional national and global scales in the digital era. to deal with complex issues learning and collaboration are vital in all sectors of society in order to include various perspectives and competences across organisational borders bernhard  olsson 2020.
 united nations 2021. the 17 goals conference structure in line with the olkc theme learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability the conference presents different tracks one general track three thematic tracks as well as a doctoral students day. the general track invites submissions broadly concerned with questions of organizational learning knowledge innovation and the capabilities that organisations foster or require for approaching these. learning future workforce capabilities for global sustainability is the general track of olkc 2022  covering diverse practices organizations people and disciplines. learning how to thrive in the new landscape of work and professional contexts where digitalization and sustainability are two main challenges for contemporary organizations becomes vital. to create conditions and opportunities for innovative approaches of integrating learning aspects in work contexts nowadays also needs to be set in the perspective of sustainability in all three dimensions e.g. ecologic economic and social sustainability. organizations ability to support a sustainable development of both human and technical capabilities will be the outstanding success. how values and efforts regarding employees learning capabilities are taken into account when designing and managing the organizations financial and technical resources will be of special interest. the new un report from may 2021 tells us that it is not too late to make a difference. it calls for a transformative change a fundamental systemwide reorganization across technological economic and social factors including paradigms goals and values but only if we start now at every level from local to global ipbes chair sir robert watson. knowledge learning and continuous development of workforce competencies are of vital importance for a sustainable society. this implies not only knowledge management together with a critical reflection in action but also commitment and participation in crosssector and interorganisational actions. a constantly changing society requires organizations to explore and implement new ways of learning and working. for example demographic development is a major challenge for the healthcare sector and the artificial technologies are posing challenges for human empowerment and judgement in the industrial sector and in the society as a whole. organizations face complex problems that require new information knowledge and competences to make informed decisions where the outcomes are not known in advance. to support this organisations are increasingly governed by means of technology or other types of digital infrastructures or algorithmic logics. people in organisations are constantly confronted with new and different challenges requiring learning of new practices adaption of new strategies and technologies but also a readiness to leave behind old ways of organising and working. in order to stay competitive in the third decade of 21st century and to be a pioneer for building future organisational capabilities it requires courage confidence and trust. hence learning is an equally important aspect from a management perspective. managers or owners are also facing the need to critically analyse their existing ways of working and learning and this will require to reskill and
 collaborative approaches to workintegrated learning
 this track is about workintegrated learning wil which can be seen as a collective concept encapsulating a variety of different approaches in understanding learning. theoretical and practical knowledge and experiences are integrated and linked in workplaces as well as in educational contexts billett 2009. as working life has become increasingly complex everchanging and unpredictable workers face new and growing demands to engage in continuous learning training activities and formal education. this development is reflected in a renewed academic interest and learning at work.
 learning and organizing for digital transformation
 in this track we invite empirical and theoretical papers exploring perspectives on learning and organising for digital transformation. the digital transformation demands new qualities and competencies of professionals and changes in norms cultures as well as organisational support and leadership. it forces organisations and management to provide conditions for competence development and learning and this will have fundamental implications in all parts of the working life and society in general billett 2014 vallo hult et al. 2022.
 senior olkc scholars organising the doctoral students day professor lars svensson university west sweden and professor carsten sørensen london school of economics london great britain.
 extended abstract submission deadline april 10. 2022
 extended abstract submission deadline for doctoral students day april 17 2022
 extended abstract minimum 500 words maximum 700 words excluding references. the extended abstract should include title of the extended abstract selected thematic track or general track keywords names and academic title of the authors affiliations complete mail addresses email addresses and corresponding author.
 email submission the extended abstract should be sent by email to olkc2022@hv.se
 submit the abstract using the word 2013 version of microsoft or later version. we suggest naming your file presenters name_olkc2022.docx to avoid confusion between abstracts.
 results of the review process will be communicated to corresponding authors by approximately june 19. 2022.
 submission deadline for complete papers accepted for presentation in word 2013 or later version august 14. 2022. guidelines for complete papers will be announced.
 conference chair professor ann svensson ann.svensson@hv.se university west sweden.
 program chairs professor ulrika lundh snis ulrika.snis@hv.se professor ann svensson ann.svensson@hv.se and assistant professor iréne bernhard irene.bernhard@hv.se university west sweden.
 organizing chair assistant professor iréne bernhard irene.bernhard@hv.se university west sweden.
 for more information see  contact us on olkc2022@hv.se
 university west is proud to welcome the olkc conference to campus and to the city of trollhättan
 these pages will help you to find information concerning the practical matters when visiting our campus and trollhättan. click on one of the boxes below and start exploring if you cant find the information your looking for or have any other questions or concerns please do not hesistate to contact us. for general inquires about the conference olkc2022@hv.se
 find you hotell and learn more about your visit to trollhättan
 visiting campus
 explore and learn more about campus
 olutayo demonstrates how gas turbines can be more efficient and climatesmart
 olutayo adegokes thesis offers new and valuable insights for among others gas turbine manufacturers wanting to reduce the climate impact of their products.
 gas turbines are used for example to produce heat and electricity in cogeneration plants. the turbine blades in a gas turbine must be able to handle extremely high temperatures. to this end the alloy 247lc is an excellent material to use. conventional casting is currently used to manufacture turbine blades but gas turbine manufacturers see major advantages in using lbpf instead provided that the method is reliable.
 since turbine blades have complex geometries lbpf manufacturing is far more suitable than casting. its considerably easier to manufacture complex designs using lbpf and there are almost no limits on component design explains olutayo who defended his thesis at university west on 16 december.
 reduced fuel consumption and increased efficiency
 in service this means that turbine blades manufactured using lbpf can handle even higher temperatures than turbine blades that have been cast. this enables a reduction in fuel consumption which increases efficiency. in turn this generates lower carbon dioxide emissions which lessens climate impact.
 he lists four more advantages of lbpf
 significantly shorter lead times within production
 little need for post processing
 suitable for repairing components
 before a new manufacturing method can be used any risk of cracks or other defects in the material must be eliminated. an alloy can react in completely different ways to different manufacturing methods. accordingly olutayo has studied how alloy 247lc is affected during powder bedbased additive manufacturing in great detail that is he has examined how the materials microstructure and properties are affected by the relationships between the various parameters controlling the production process.
 he has for example manufactured around thirty cubes of alloy 247lc where he has tested different combinations of the parameters laser power speed and hatch distance.
 its a case of finding the optimal combination of parameters where the material is completely free from defects and where you get the very properties youre seeking.
 unexpected discovery
 ill continue developing materials for additive manufacturing in other product areas. the companys workshop for industrial additive manufacturing in finspång was the first of its kind in sweden and theyre well ahead of the competition even internationally when it comes to the additive manufacturing of metal components.
 read olutayo adegokes thesis processability of laser powder bed fusion of alloy 247lc. influence of process parameters on microstructure and defects
 from political correctness to reflexivity 2020
 a theoretical framework for emancipatory nursing 2018
 process understanding and optimization of fusion welding towards a sustainable future
 in 2021 paul published the book advancements in intelligent gas metal arc welding systems describing the stateoftheart of gas metal arc welding providing a solid theoretical basis and enabling deeper understanding of parameter selection.
 to the consumer welding often remains an unseen process yet its importance to product quality and sustainability should not be underestimated.
 paul kah is working as a professor in welding technology at the department of engineering science university west trollhättan sweden.
 inam alghoul support group network
 the department of communication and international relations is responsible for the website. the communications manager has the main responsibility.
 we would like to receive feedback and suggestions on how to make hv.se even better. send email to webmaster@hv.se.
 problems on the site?
 questions about hv.se and possible problem reports are preferably sent by email to webmaster@hv.se and not to individual individuals. then we have the best chance to follow up the problems.
 in order for us to be able to resolve any problems as quickly as possible the mail should contain the following
 the address url of the page containing errors or problems
 your name and contact information if you want feedback from us
 which operating system and which browser preferably with version number you are using
 as good description as possible of the problem.
 copyright materials on the site
 all material image text audio and mobile media etc. on hv.se is protected by law. republishing of material may only be done by agreement. when used by law such as citing and linking source indication hv.se must be stated.
 security
 contact servicenter@hv.se for reporting data violations inappropriate www pages improper network utilization etc.
 visitor data statistics and analysis
 to quality check and develop our website we use an analysis tool from siteimprove.
 anonymized ip number
 your ip address will be anonymized automatically. this means that the statistics are not traced back to you as an individual.
 we support do not track to protect your privacy. if do not track is turned on in your browser it prevents websites from tracking your activity for feedback or other purposes. it stops analytics and ad networks from gathering information about which site you have navigated to or how you landed on a particular page.
 a cookie is a small text file stored on the visitors computer and containing information. cookies are usually used to improve the site for the user.
 there are two types of cookies
 one type saves a file that is left on the visitors computer. for example it is used to customize a site according to the visitors wishes choices and interests.
 the other type is called session cookie. during the time a visitor is browsing a webpage a session cookie is temporarily stored in the visitors computers memory. . session cookies disappear when you turn off the web browser.
 if you do not accept the use of cookies you can turn off cookies through your browsers security settings. you can also set the browser to get a warning every time the site tries to create a cookie on your computer.
 more information about cookies and electronic communications can be found on the the swedish post and telecom authority website.
 the swedish website  provides information about how to handle cookies in different browsers.
 why cookies are used on hv.se?
 a session cookie with the same name as the site is automatically added by our web platform. this cookie is required for the site to function as intended.
 share function
 you can share the information on hv.se through the share button found on most pages.
 if you do not find what you are looking for then just try synonyms and  or inflections of words. for example exam examination.
 make sure you spell it correctly.
 hajbolouri a. 2022. the experience of immersive virtual reality a phenomenology inspired inquiry. communications of the association for information systems 52 pppp. 16
 olsson a.k. eriksson k.m. and carlsson l. 2024 management toward industry 5.0 a coworkership approach on digital transformation for future innovative manufacturing european journal of innovation management vol. aheadofprint no. aheadofprint.
 walter l.  styhre a. 2013 the role of organizational objects in construction projects the case of the collapse and restoration of the tjörn bridge construction management and economics 3112 11721185.
 on campus eexamination
 the subproject aims to implement a system and ensure suitable halls for digital exams.
 welcome to the grand openingon april 17th from 100 pm to 230 pm house b floor 3 its time for the grand opening. vicechancellor mats jägstam will cut the ribbon there will be sparkling drinks snacks and a opportunity to meet the project and have a look around
 continously work during spring  the project has been granted additional funds to further increase the number of digital writing seats through laptops. this is done to meet the demand for digital exams in the organisation. the work to install the laptops is planned to begin in the spring and be in full operation by the fall of 2024.
 what has been done?
 the renovation of the examination hall on the 3rd floor of building b is now completed. we have also had a couple of digital exams in it. it has a total of 94 digital writing seats and there are two group rooms with two writing seats each. additionally the hall has a new accessible toilet which is very beneficial as it was lacking access to one previously. in total the project has now delivered 138 digital writing seats in two different halls and 16 seats distributed across four group rooms.
 after the first exams in june we conducted a student survey. it showed that students were generally satisfied with both the inspera system the new hall and the procedures for digital exams. some students felt that the room was cramped and that it was easy to see other students computer screens. based on this feedback we have rearranged the room and taken the need for different furnishing into account in the planning of the next hall.  teachers are also satisfied with the entire process. they have saved time by being able to decipher students answers compared to poor handwriting before through some automatic grading and automatic feedback to ladok. on the negative side several teachers believe that the learning curve for inspera is slightly higher than they initially thought it is not as intuitive as they would have liked. they found that the canvas training provided was a good support.
 teachers participating in digital exam pilots so far is thomas lundqvist and andreas de blanche iv celia aijmer rydsjö ios kristina furubacke iv mats lejon iv karin svensson ei marie jansson ögren ios mathias zannakis ios dragana milesic karsson ih ylva johansson ei helen holmgren and annika larsson ei  pilot study 2019 in 2019 the university conducted a pilot study with digital exams in which a number of conditions were identified. the experiences from the pilot are incorporated into this implementation project.  system support 2022 inspera is the system purchased for digital classroom exams. the system is procured via sunet and is used by 22 other higher education institutions in sweden all institutions in norway and in several other places around the world.
 onedrive  faq
 information about the cloud service onedrive.
 what is onedrive?
 onedrive is a cloud service for storing files for professional use. onedrive is part of office 365. onedrive can be compared to dropbox box or google drive. staff and students at university west have access to onedrive.
 how to use onedrive
 all files you store in onedrive are personal by default. you can share files and collaborate in documents with users at the university.
 store up to 1 tb
 250 gb maximum size of each file
 access and synchronization
 you can access your files via any browser or mobile device
 you can synchronize your files locally to your computer  computers for working offline.
 create and edit microsoft office files in the cloud with office web apps
 what happens when you finish at university west?
 when you finish at university west your office 365 account is closed. therefore it is important that you manage your files on your own in good time before the end date.
 go to the get started with onedrive page.
 online application
 online application engineering visions 2024
 family namelast name
 mobile phone number
 dietary restrictions food allergies
 you apply through an online system for mobility which we also use for processing your application documentation and other support services during the mobilityperiod. below you find instructions on how to apply.
 in the online application form the details needed are divided into sections.
 please find each section listed below. once you click on the section you find information about what to enter there.
 once you have submitted the online form you will get a confirmation email containing a link through which you create your personal data account and upload remaining documents for the application
 transcript of records studieintygresultatintyg. downlowad from ladok for studentscertificates  national result certificate
 documentation of interational commitments within student union or similar not mandatory to upload
 once you have submitted your application international office will check your documentation so that all documentation needed is there and the reception of all documents are ok. it may take up until deadline or a few days after before this step in the process will be marked as done by us.
 choose year and semester for your exchange period the period you want to spend abroad for studies.
 personal id number fill in your personal number as specified in the form yymmddxxxx. you will need to enter this number later on in the process when you create your account so make sure to put in the right digits.
 all fields in this section are mandatory.
 all fields in this section are mandatory in case we need to get in contact with a family member. relationship is not mandatory but helpful in such a situation.
 studies at university west
 information on your current studies
 faculty this choice will filter the alternatives of exchange options you choose in next section. choose which department your programme runs at
 department school of buisness economics and it eidepartment of engineering sciences ivdepartment of social and behavioural sciences iosdepartment of health sciences ih
 if you are unsure of which department your programme belongs to you can follow the link below
 programme studies at university west choose which programme you are currently studying at.
 level of study choose which level you are studying at.
 number of academic years completed state in number how many years you have been studying at university west. if you have been studying at another university also that should be included in the figure.
 planned studies abroad
 this is where you choose which universities you want to apply for.
 please choose several options as we cannot guarantee that you would be accepted to your first option if you are eligible for exchange studies. there may be several students applying for the same exchange opportunity and we have limited number of seats for each so make sure to set your priorities in the right order.
 if you have problems on this section please contact us at international@hv.se and we will help you.
 other information
 you need ot tick the box to acknowledge that you have read the information on how your personal data will be processed before you can send the application.
 here you will find all the universitys opening hours.
 regular opening hours
 monday  thursday 08.0016.30friday 08.0016.00the phone is closed for lunch 12.0013.00 and closes at 14.00 on mondays
 weekend and holiday times servicecenter 2024
 24 january 09.00  15.00 closed for lunch 12.00  13.005 january epiphany 09.00  12.0028 march maundy thursday 08.00  12.0029 march good friday closed1 april easter monday closed
 30 april walpurgis eve 08.00  12.00
 1 may closed
 9 may ascension day closed10 may 08.00  12.00
 week 25  3109.00  15.00 closed for lunch 12.00  13.00
 1 november halloween 0800  120023 december 08.00  12.0025 december christmas day closed26 december boxing day closed27 december 09.00  15.00 closed for lunch 12.00  13.0030 december 09.00  15.00 closed for lunch 12.00  13.00
 09.00  15.00 closed for lunch 12.00  13.00
 monday  thursday 07.3016.30friday 7.3016.00
 summer period w. 25 to w. 31
 monday  thursday 07.3020.00friday 07.3017.00saturday 10.0014.00deviations may occur
 students with a west card enter from 0700 every day of the yearstaff with a west card come in from 0600 every day of the yearthe premises must be vacated by 23.00
 opening hours public
 in addition to daytime opening hours the public has access to the areas at the café and library until 2000 on weekdays and 10001400 on saturdays.the public does not have access to other premises in the evenings.
 here you will find the librarys opening hours
 please note that some info on this page is outdated as we are working on a completely new web page for the lab to be up very soon. dont forget that every monday we have openfika at openlab j337 where you can come by and drink coffee and chat with us.
 exploring emerging interaction technologies for innovative and sustainable digitalization. by mixing the real with the virtual by balancing human intelligence with artificial and by letting human capabilities and wellbeing guide our design processes we identify new ways and places for learning and doing.
 all our currently open proposals fro msc and bsc thesis projects can be found here
 phd student visiting rit us
 open phd position in ai
 march 29 2022 open phd studentship in work integrated learning  with focus on artificial intelligence for emerging virtualmixedaugmented reality platforms upcoming rerelease
 open phd position in vr
 march 29 2022 open phd studentship in work integrated learning  with focus on virtual reality for sustainable safety training and meaningful learning in industrial contexts varbi.com hired
 current application areas and projects
 industrial workintegrated learning weld vr. partners . funding .
 industrial operator support for assembly tillverka i trä. partners . funding eu regional fund.
 industrial operator support for machine restart restart ii. partners husqvarna ab sansera ab maintmaster ab. funding kk foundation.
 subtle visual guidance in ar for assembly tasks. partner rochester institute of technology. funding stint.
 ai for subtle visual guidance i social ar game situation awarenessbased attention guidance. partner malmö university. funding crafoord foundation.
 exploration of hiring discrimination and possibilities for intervention through eyetracking. partners malmö university lund university. funding swedish science foundation.
 people
 senior lecturer                        phd and associate professor of information systems
 what is a service window?
 a service window is a specified time to perform maintenance on the servers network and desktop computers. it can for instance be to install the latest updates.a planned service window always occurs at the same time. service windows makes the planning of maintenance work easier while giving users the ability to plan their work before a shutdown and thus reduce the influence of the interruption.  it is common to schedule the service window outside normal working hours to cause as little disruption as possible to the business. if users are affected this will be announced under messages on the web.
 the service  it departments service windows
 to provide an it infrastructure with high availability security and stability an ongoing system management and maintenance work is required.
 socalled service windows are an important part of this support and maintenance work.
 we have service windows every wednesday at 430 pm until 11 pm.
 during the service windows may this occur
 updates and upgrades of servers and systems new releases and technical support etc. system managers should check functionality on thursday mornings. this means that there may be interruptions in our delivered services such as for example home directory wireless networks and canvas.
 updates of the client computers in other words student and staff computers. restarting the computer may occur.
 we also have a smaller service window every wednesday morning before 800 am. this should not cause any interference.
 any further information on the service windows and other planned interruptions will be announced on the student web pages.
 operations  supply chain management  level 2
 an overall approach to logistics business management and information technology
 more specific areas studied by the group are for instance
 lean and agile systems and their development.  for example the impact of artificial intelligence and augmented reality techniques for the digitalization of lean and six sigma.
 operations  supply chain management
 most production systems are international in nature so that a holistic view of global supply chains is necessary to both make improvements in efficiency and in achieving organizational goals.  these goals increasingly emphasize sustainability which is a major challenge for supply chains which are generally designed in a linear manner and need to become both more efficient and more circular to address global sustainability goals.
 thematic leader  operations and supply chain management
 operations and supply chain management fulltime campus lov600
 the course is an advanced course which takes a comprehensive approach of operations and supply chain management and its connections to other disciplines. the course focuses on describing operations and supply chain management through the lens of systems theory which reflects a holistic perspective. key concepts and theories within operations and supply chain management are covered. specific topics within operations and supply chain management are introduced covering issues such as different types of flows physical information and commercial flows supply chain strategies and the importance of time in supply chains.
 bachelor of science in business administration informatics system science computer science industrial engineering and management mechanical engineering electrical engineering or equivalent. english equivalent to english course 6 in the swedish upper secondary school.
 operations strategy and execution parttime campus vsi700
 the course is based on operations and supply chain management and builds further to shed light on collaboration between production systems and organizations strategy design. the course deals with themes such as corporate strategy business strategy and supply chain in collaboration from a competitiv perspective.
 lunchmeny och mer information
 lunch serveras 1115  1330
 opportunities and challenges of neurodiversity in manufacturing developing and adapting human resource management for neurodiverse workplaces
 in the project opportunities and challenges with neurological diversity will be studied.
 ordering certification
 here you can order different certifications.
 as a student at university westand have an active student account with us produce your certificates yourself at ladok for students. the first time you log in you need to select a university write hv.se in the box and select university west. under the certificates tab you can then createdownload the certificate you need.
 keep in mind that your browser can in some cases block popups you must then allow this to be able to download the certificate.
 these certificates do not need to be signed by staff at the university but they can be verified via a code and are therefore as legally secure as a certificate with a signature.
 you who were previously a student alumn
 if you do not have an account here at the university or the possibility to use bankid and freja eid fill in the form below and get your certificate sent home shortly. the certificate goes to the address where you are registered.remember that a course certificate is only given for individual courses and you must enter the course code upon your request. download a complete transcript of results from ladok if you want the result for all your courses.
 i want to order following certificates
 city
 informationen uppdateras
 15 mars lars walter. building resilient labor markets in the face of structural change
 10 maj elizabeth kals. explaining and promoting readiness to engage in organizations
 beata basinska phd associate professor faculty of management and economics gdansk university of technology
 advisory board
 ulf axelson frilansande journalist axelson information ab
 nilsson h. 2022. social workers as an actionoriented sociotherapist an existential health discourse. journal of religion and spirituality in social work.
 dåderman a. m.  kajonius p. 2022. an item response theory analysis of the trait emotional intelligence questionnaire shortform teiquesf in the workplace. heliyon 8 2 e08884.
 nilsson h. 2021. spiritual selfcare management for nursing professionals a holistic approach. journal of holistic nursing. doi10.117708980101211034341
 pennbrant s.  dåderman a. m. 2021. job demands work engagement and job turnover intentions among registered nurses explained by workfamily private life inference. work a journal of prevention assessment and rehabilitation 68 11571169.
 nilsson h.  kazemi a. 2021. mindful human resource management combining buddhist principles of enlightenment with diversity management. international journal of management concepts and philosophy 142 114134.
 kazemi a.  elfstrand corlin t. 2021. linking supportive leadership to satisfaction with care proposing and testing a serviceprofit chain inspired model in the context of elderly care. journal of health organization and management 354 492510.
 kazemi a.  kajonius p. 2021. understanding client satisfaction in elderly care new insights from social resource theory. european journal of ageing 18 417425.
 dåderman a. m. ingelgård a.  koopmans l. 2020. crosscultural adaptation from dutch to swedish language of the individual work performance questionnaire. work a journal of prevention assessment and rehabilitation 65 97109.
 hjalmarsson a. k. v.  dåderman a. m. 2020. relationship between emotional intelligence personality and selfperceived individual work performance a crosssectional study on the swedish version of teiquesf. current psychology 41 25582573
 basinska b. a.  dåderman a. m. 2019. work values of police officers and their relationship with job burnout and work engagement. frontiers in psychology 10442. doi 10.3389fpsyg.2019.00442
 nilsson h. 2017. existential social work and the quest for existential meaning and wellbeing a conceptual framework. journal of religion  spirituality in social work social thought 344 118.
 eriksson t. g. mascheno j. g.  dåderman a. m. 2017. personality traits of prisoners as compared to general populations signs of adjustment to the situation? personality and individual differences 107 237245.
 corlin t.  kazemi a. 2017. accounting for job satisfaction examining the interplay of person and situation. scandinavian journal of psychology 58 436442.
 kazemi a. 2017. conceptualizing and measuring occupational social wellbeing a validation study. international journal of organizational analysis 25 45  61.
 nilsson h. 2016. socioexistential mindfulness bringing empathy and compassion into health care settings. spirituality in clinical practice 31 2231. apa journal.
 dåderman a. m.  basinska b. a. 2016. job demands engagement and turnover intentions in polish nurses the role of workfamily interface. frontiers in psychology. nov 171621.
 kajonius p. j. kazemi a.  tengblad s. 2016. organizing principles and management climate in highperforming municipal elderly care. leadership in health services 29 8294.
 ekegren m.  dåderman a. m. 2015. leadership intelligence before and after participation in leadership training. international journal of transpersonal studies 34 2333.
 grankvist g. 2015. an examination of swedish human resource management students beliefs about what work should ideally be like. international journal of social science studies 34 166171.
 kazemi a. 2015. promotion. in f. f. wherry  j. b. schor eds. the sage encyclopedia of economics and society pp. 13361337. sage publications.
 kazemi a. törnblom k. mikula g. 2015. justice social psychological perspectives. in james d. wright editorinchief international encyclopedia of the social  behavioral sciences 2nd edition vol 12. oxford elsevier. pp. 949955.
 dåderman a. m.  de colli d. 2014. the significance of sense of coherence for various coping resources in stress situations used by police officers in onthebeat service. international journal of occupational medicine and environmental health 27 315.
 basinska b. a. wiciak i.  dåderman a. m. 2014. fatigue and burnout in police officers the mediating role of emotions. policing an international journal of police strategies  management 37 665680.
 kazemi a. stark ekman d.  kylberg e. 2014. differing attitudes toward health and sickness. in l. h. cousins ed. encyclopedia of human services and diversity pp. 616618. sage publications.
 dåderman a. m.  basinska b. a. 2013. exploring the factor structure and the validity of the abbreviated basic and earning selfesteem scales. nordic psychology 65 242258.
 dåderman a. m. ronthy m. ekegren m.  mårdberg b. 2013. managing with my heart brain and soul the development of the leadership intelligence questionnaire. journal of cooperative education and internships 47 6177.
 andersson t. kazemi a. tengblad s.  wickelgren m. 2011. not the inevitable bleak house? the positive experiences of workers and managers in retail employment in sweden. in i. grugulis and ö bozkurt eds. retail work pp. 253276. palgrave macmillan.
 magnus andersson ofrtobias arvemo sacos
 organizers and contacts
 airialina allaste professor of sociology tallinn university
 signe ravn lecturer school of social and political sciences university of melbourne
 iceland
 gestur gudmundsson professor at the iceland university of education reykjavik
 emma sorbring professor of child and youth studies university west
 thomas johansson professor of education gothenburg university
 osa lundberg phd student in pedagogic gothenburg university
 marcus herz phd in social work malmö university
 jesper andreasson ass. professor in sport science linnéuniversitetet
 margareta bohlin ass. professor in psychology university west
 kristian danneback professor in social work gothenburg university
 if you have questions about the conference please contact
 emma sorbring university west  thomas johansson gothenburg university
 if you have questions about registration payment accommodation travel to trollhättan please contact event@hv.se
 margareta bohlin university westjesper andreasson linnaeus university
 all the phd students gathered on the first day of the conference.
 everything from phd students to professors have met on a common level to discuss developments in organizational learning and knowledge development. discussions and reflections have flourished in various contexts says a satisfied ann svensson professor of informatics at university west and responsible for the conference.
 a friendly and inviting atmosphere
 it feels like a very successful conference. i presented a paper and it felt like a lot of people had really read it and i got great feedback. in addition it is a very friendly and inviting atmosphere.
 kristinas presentation was focused on lifelong learning and had the title may the force of lifelong learning be with you  sustainable organizational learning in higher education to meet company needs in industry.
 omelet recipes provided a common thread
 one of two key notes were clay spinuzzi professor of rhetoric and writing at the university of texas at austin in the usa.
 as a common thread in his lecture there was an example of how to learn to make an omelet via a recipe and how to build knowledge in different ways based on three parts.
 initially he showed an example with only a textbased recipe written with rather small text in a cookbook from the past and how we could still understand from what was written there how to make an omelet. that we can take this to heart is because we are familiar with how a recipe is constructed through proven experience abstract  symbolic.
 in step two clay showed how the recipe is now made as a story with stepbystep photos showing how to make and more. we understand and learn by being shown via images as a story narrative.
 in step three there is also a video included in the recipe where we learn by doing the cooking together with the chef and get described to us for example how the texture should feel. this expands understanding and knowledge even more embodied.
 these three steps show different kinds of knowledge and how we can understand and how knowledge is rerepresented. clay spinuzzi also talked about examples from working life that could be divided in a similar way whether it concerned for example a medical diagnosis or traffic safety.
 focus on ai in keynote speakers
 alongside clay spinuzzi margunn aanestad from the university of agder in norway was also the keynote speaker at the conference. she spoke about understanding the impact that artificial intelligence ai has on learning in organizations how ai affects the work in organizations when they develop their ai skills and how learning in workplaces is affected when ai is introduced.
 relationship learning in focus
 relationship learning is a joint activity between customer and retailer that occurs because both parties create more value together than they would on their own. its about sharing information and forming a joint sensemaking that you then build on.
 about crisis management in healthcare
 ritva rosenbäcks presentation was about an ongoing study on crisis management in healthcare  crisis management learning for leaders in public healthcare. in the study nearly 40 managers were interviewed who held leading positions in departments affected by the covid pandemic in hospital care. the focus of the study is on learning and crises with the help of two case studies. the studies have been carried out partly in a mediumsized hospital with emergency care in a large region where there were early and serious outbreaks of covid and partly in a mediumsized hospital with fewer and later cases of the disease.
 ritva rosebäck about crisis managament in healthcare.
 ritva uses the framework developed by boin et al. 2005 on crisis leadership in the study. the framework focuses on three of the core tasks  sense making decision making and meaning making  that are relevant to explaining the role of public leaders during the ongoing crisis. she presents excerpts from the study and discusses them. something that becomes clear is the importance of trust. for example that a freedom to make decisions increases the transfer of knowledge and initiates new thinking and that daily meetings increase organizational learning.
 next year the conference will be held in may in riga latvia.
 contact ann svensson responsible for this years conference at university west ann.svensson@hv.se
 mechanical engineering abroad oskars exchange experience
 oskar andersson a mechanical engineering student at university west describes his exchange in madrid at uc3m as the best decision of his university life. he highlights the joy of exploring beautiful places making lifelong friends and the challenge of adjusting to a different academic structure.
 oskar andersson a mechanical engineering student at university west reflects on his transformative exchange experience in madrid at uc3m. describing it as the best decision he made during his studies. oskar expresses i have gone to so many beautiful places done so many new things and met so many extraordinary people. it has been a great time and definitely the most fun experience i have had since i started studying at the university.
 the highlight of oskars exchange was the multitude of trips both in and outside of spain. he particularly treasures the weeklong trip to morocco during easter and the numerous hikes with the one to manzanares el real standing out.
 one of the biggest surprises for oskar in spain was the openness and friendliness of everyone he encountered. despite language barriers people were warm and receptive making the experience even more enriching. oskar notes meeting new people from all over the world not just from spain was my favorite thing about my studies abroad.
 however oskar also encountered some challenges especially dealing with the before mentioned language barrier. while courses at uc3m were in english navigating daily tasks like document translations and communicating with teachers posed difficulties. simple activities such as asking for directions or making phone calls became a bit challenging in spanish.
 offering advice to prospective students interested in studying abroad oskar highlights the adjustment required for different academic structures. dealing with all courses simultaneously including exams midterms homework and labs posed a significant challenge compared to the swedish system of splitting courses into two periods.
 as oskar bids farewell to his exchange period he expresses that what he will miss the most are the people he met. forming close bonds with individuals from various countries through classes and erasmus events saying goodbye after months of connection can be emotionally challenging. oskar has made lifelong friends and plans to make an effort to see them again in the future.
 phd in nondestructive evaluation
 guided wave evaluation techniques for testing of platelike concrete structures
 investigation of fundamental ultrasonic propagation characteristics in ndt of electron beam melted additive manufactured samples  inconel 718
 oskar tofeldt s.g. pierce g. smillie w. kerr g.m.h. flockhart c.n. macleod r. blue a. gachagan t. stratoudaki jonas olsson d. mcmahon
 other ways to report
 whistleblow in other channels
 in addition to the internal reporting channel anyone who wants to report misconduct and irregularities can also do so via other public authorities or through other publication.
 internally misconduct and irregularities can be reported through the dedicated whistleblower service via kpmg. it is of course also possible to contact a function at the university directly for example the manager lawyer or the hr department.
 there are also a number of authorities that have been given a special mandate by the government to receive whistleblowing from outside.
 anyone who wants to report a misconduct can themselves choose the reporting channel that is most appropriate depending on the circumstances and their own assessment of the risk of reprisals.
 external reporting channels
 external reporting channels have been established for the purpose of handling reporting on violations that are within a certain authoritys area of responsibility. it can for example be used if the whistleblower does not trust in objective and factual handling of internal reporting.
 it is up to the whistleblower to choose whether reporting should take place internally or externally and it is possible to report directly to an external reporting channel without first reporting internally. external reporting does not limit whistleblower protection regardless of whether or not the reporting concerns a matter that falls outside the authoritys area of responsibility.
 please go to the swedish version of this page to find links to all public authorities where you can make an external whistleblower report.
 remarks about reporting via external reporting channels
 the possibility to report misconduct of public interest does not apply in an external reporting channel. in that case the misconduct must concern a violation of eu law.
 whistleblowing can also be done through publication. it means that information about misconduct is made available to the public. it can be achieved by the reporting person himself publishing the information in some medium that is available to the public e.g. social media.
 publication also includes if information is provided to an actor or a journalist who then disseminatespublishes it. reporting by publication can be done anonymously.
 remarks about publication
 if reporting is done through publication one of the following conditions must be present for the person to be protected by the whistleblower act
 an authority that has an external reporting channel has failed in its duty to take measures
 that the misconduct entails a risk to life and health or
 that the reporting person has reasonable grounds to believe that there is a risk of retaliation.
 information about the teaching and education at the catc scandinavia university west.
 courses we offer
 ccna 1  introduction to networks
 ccna 2  routing  switching essentials
 ccna 3  scaling networks
 ccna 4  connecting networks
 ccnp route switch or troubleshooting
 wireless
 initial instructions
 you must read the curricula before the course starts.
 every course starts on a monday at 10.00 in building b room b129. this is very important since it is then we decide your schedule for the week.
 all courses include chapter tests a theoretical test called final exam and a practical test callled skills exam.
 there is a mandatory precense demand in all our course since they are 100 in person not blended. each course must be completed within 5 working days.
 to become an academy instructor you must pass the instructor course and take the orientation course.
 to become a cisco certified academy instructor ccai you must do three things pass all 4 ccna instructor courses take the commercial ccna certificate and teach all 4 courses at least once.
 ccai status is not a requirement for teaching in the networking academy.
 orientation course self paced
 new instructors are required to create their own selfpaced orientation classes.
 for more information click orientation course
 this is a firm applicationregistration for an educational event at university west.
 cancellations and refunds educational course
 full refund of educational programcourse fees will be made for reservations cancelled no later than four weeks prior to the start of the programcourse. later cancellations incur a cancellation fee as follows
 2 weeks or less prior to program start 100 of the educational programcourse fee
 24 weeks prior to program start 50 of the educational programcourse fee
 cancellation and postponement must be made in writing.
 university west reserves the right to cancel an educational course in which case paid participant fees will be refunded. additional compensation will not be made. we reserve the right to correct typos and other errors in the information provided above.
 at university west all that we do and all the services we provide are grounded in the principle that all people are created equal and that democracy and diversity contribute to social welfare justice and sustainable social development.
 our university is characterised and distinguished by academic freedom quality integrity and honesty.
 the universitys fundamental values have their origins in the values established for all swedish government employees.
 the swedish governments council on basic values
 three domains
 the work conducted at the centre is divided into three domains.
 development family and overall conditions
 learning education and culture
 leisure peer relations and health
 our video service is down right now
 our video service  is down at the moment. this affects embedded videos in canvas. sunet announces that the problem is being fixed and service should be restored at ca 1245.
 padlet  an educational tool
 the university has a license for padlet. it is an educational tool and can be compared to making posts in a digital writing surface. the padlet has many uses and can be used for example for collaboration notes links and discussions both for online and in classroom teaching either synchronously or asynchronously.
 the padlet can be used freestanding or embedded on one side of the canvas.it is also possible to use padlet in the canvas student app.
 please read our instructions.
 claim your license here.
 students cant create theit own padlets but they can participate in padlets created by teachers.
 to be able to login you first need to request for an university west account on padlet. see information below.
 what is padlet?
 how do i get an account?
 how do i create a padlet?
 how do i set student permission?
 how do i share a padlet in canvas?
 padlet is an educational tool and can be compared to making posts on a digital writing surface. the padlet has many uses and can be used for example for collaboration notes links and discussions both online and in classroom teaching either synchronously or asynchronously.
 padlet can be used independently or embedded on a page in canvas.it is also possible to use padlet in the canvas student app.
 students cant create their own padlets but they can participate in those created by teachers.
 have you requested an hv account in padlet? if not do so by filling out this form.
 once we have received your information we will create an account for you. you will receive an email confirmation from padlet with a link to your account there may be information about changing the password in the email but you do not need to do so when using your hv account.
 when logging in select sign in with microsoft and your usual login credentials.
 log in to hv.padlet.org and choose make a padlet. select the template you wish to have and begin creating
 how do i set student permissions?
 open share settings in the righthand side menu.
 select visitor permission writer. visitors can write posts.
 select link privacy secret. only people with the link can access it.
 you can share a link or embed your padlet to enable the students to post directly in canvas.
 click on the share settings in the righthand side menu
 select copy link to clipboard
 paste the link
 click the share settings in the righthand side menu
 select embed on your blog or your website.
 click copy padlet embed code.
 go to your course in canvas.
 create or open an existing page to edit.
 click on the cloud to embed.
 paste the code from padlet into the field submit and then save your page.
 padlet in teaching
 example of use
 habil kalkan ph.d. turkey associate professor at gebze technical university
 project information in english
 the father  child relationsship a longitudal study over 33 years
 the gothenburg longitudinal developmental study gold is a prospective longitudinal study of 144 swedish participants and their families that we have followed from age one to two until recently when they were 33 years old.
 the results show that there is a certain degree of stability over time in father involvement. fathers who are highly involved early on seem to be so even later in life. the findings offer a deepened understanding of the struggles of trying to balance work and family as well as salient issues pertaining to family relationships throughout the lifespan.
 extension in rural development the problem of the two cultures  monological or dialogical communication?azril bacal roij uppsala universitet
 parent resource  a depened and broadened support for families in need
 parent resource  a deepened and broadened support for families in need
 parenting adolescent selfregulation and risktaking across cultures
 it is widely agreed among experts in the study of adolescent health and development that the greatest threats to the wellbeing of young people in industrialized societies come from preventable and often selfinflicted causes including automobile and other accidents violence drug and alcohol use and sexual risktaking. although considerable progress has been made in the prevention and treatment of disease and chronic illness among this age group similar gains have not been made with respect to reducing the morbidity and mortality that result from risky and reckless behavior.
 this study utilizes the most culturally diverse sample ever assembled to provide an unprecedented opportunity to understand biological familial and cultural processes in the development of selfregulation and risktaking. we aim to understand how risktaking develops across adolescence as a function of biological maturation puberty and age and socialization parenting and culture.
 we have started the largest known prospective study of these processes by recruiting a sample of 1417 8yearolds and their mothers and fathers from 13 cultures jinan and shanghai china colombia naples and rome italy jordan kenya philippines sweden thailand and african european and hispanic americans in the united states. we have assessed families annually through interviews with mothers fathers and children about the parentchild relationship the childs adjustment attitudes and beliefs and cultural values and are currently assessing selfregulation among the children who are now age 13.
 during the next phase of the project we will conduct interviews annually with mothers fathers and adolescents to assess their relationships and adolescents risktaking. we will also assess adolescents rewardseeking selfregulation social information processing and risktaking via a computerized battery administered at ages 12 14 and 16. this work will alter theories of adolescent development and will shape interventions to prevent substance use and other risky behaviors.
 suha alhassan hashemite university amman jordan and emirates college for advanced education abu dhabi uae
 dario bacchini second university of naples naples italy
 marc h. bornstein national institutes of health bethesda md usa
 kenneth a. dodge duke university durham nc usa
 jennifer w. godwin duke university durham nc usa
 patrick s. malone duke university durham nc usa
 laurence steinberg temple university philadelphia pa usa
 source center for child and family 2017. parenting adolescent selfregulation and risktaking across cultures. retrieved from
 here you will find information about parking at university west.
 weekdays from 8 am to 4 pm both payment and a digital permit are required to park in the universitys parking lot. payment via easyparks app. information can be found on signs in the car park.
 parking permit for students and staff
 you will get your digital parking permit by registering your mobile phone number in mittkonto.
 registered phone number under parking in mittkonto grants you permit to park and buy a ticket.the digital permit will be activated 0800 the next week day after registration.remember that you are also required to pay the standard parking fee. instructions on how to pay can be found on signs around the parking lot.
 permits for environmental vehicles to park for free do not apply at högskolan väst. ordinary parking fee applies.
 parking requires a permit which can be registered in serivcecenter.
 parking ticket cannot be purchased without a valid permit.
 staff can prebook permits for visitors by filling the visitors permit from no later than two days before planned visit.
 free parking is available at the ice rink ishallenisstadion approximately 600 meters from the university. note on the upper parking lot top to the left. no permit is required.
 parking for the disabled is available next to the entrance. parking is free provided you have a valid parking permit for the disabled.
 parking for electric cars
 on the parking connected to university west there are 20 parking spots where students staff and the public can charge their electric cars. the charging spots are both fee and permitfree.
 to start and pay for the charging you will need the incharge app.
 this area of the parking is a cooperation between university west kraftstaden fastigheter trollhättans stad and trollhättan energi.
 more information on how to charge your electric car link to trollhättan energi swedish site
 motorcycle parking
 motorcycles are parked in the parking space of the car park. both permit and fee are required.
 mopeds parked in bike rack suitable behind  the b building.
 bicycle parking place in bike racks outside the buildings. bicycles may not be brought into the buildning.
 parking permit terms and conditions
 registered phone number is an acceptance of these terms and conditions
 registered phone number will be uploaded to easypark
 the parking permit is personal to you as an employee student or guest at university west
 the permit is only valid together with a paid fee through easypark
 the correct vehicle registration and mobile number needs to be pickedentered in easypark
 entitles to parking subject to availability of space
 only one vehicle may be parked per permit
 map over campus and parking
 map adapted for printing
 sipass is a voluntary complement to regular instruction where organized study sessions are scheduled 12 times a week for traditionally demanding courses. these si sessions are led by a student who has successfully completed the course.
 as a teacher you can learn to better understand and support si in  courses and programs by taking a course together with si supervisors. in the supervisor training participants learn about what sipass entails how it functions and the implementation of sipass at an educational institution including budgeting selecting appropriate courses recruiting and training si leaders program followup and evaluation. the european center for sipass offers supervisor training multiple times per year.
 you can learn more about si at hv.se or find a course and register at the european center for sipass.
 do you have any questions about si and want to discuss what si could add to you course feel free to contact si@hv.se.
 particip@tion on internet? young people with intellectual disabilities and identification processes on internet
 this project aimed to describe and analyse how young people age 1620 with a mild id interacts and participate on the internet. more precisely drawing upon the perspectives of young people with id parents and school staff we have studied selfpresentations social relations and participation within different kinds of internet communities. therefore the goal of the project was to generate knowledge concerning these complex processes which could be useful for the nearest surrounding of adults in order to support and help young people with id with their internet use. the project comprised qualitative interviews with young people with id n27 parents of young people with id n22 and professionals in special schools n17. the transcribed interviews were analysed using a thematic content analysis. the project have gathered ethical approval from the ethical board of west sweden dnr 04815.
 a prominent finding in the study concerned the young informants being well aware of both risks and opportunities using internet and social networking sites. consequently the more they interacted with nondisabled peers the more they experienced negative consequences of internet use. one conclusion was that these circumstances rather lead to downsizing than upsizing internet use and as prolongation less participation on social networking sites.
 a comparative analysis of the results shows how social participation is negotiated and constructed in a dialectical way between young people with and without id but also between the young people in the study and adults in the immediate context. by applying an intersectional perspective to issues about identity formation and risktaking on the internet a more relational understanding of the problems and opportunities of digital participation can be made visible. a relational understanding of getting into difficulties implies that risk and vulnerability do not always have to depend on the disability but on contextual conditions and other covarying factors.
 considering young peoples need for autonomy it is of great importance that parents and professionals reflect upon the ways that support can be arranged in order to empower young people with id to participate on the internet. providing support for positive risktaking on the internet means that adults together with young people reflect on how possible risks can be managed rather than how risk can be avoided.
 project publications
 other presentations
 here you find the exchange programmes at university west.
 the european union has several cooperation programmes in the field of education. erasmus plus is the eus largest programme for higher education. the programme facilitates work experience and exchanges for both students and teachers in europe as well as support for cooperation between universities. university west has around 50 partner universities in europe within the erasmus plus exchange programme.
 linnaeuspalme is an exchange programme for teachers and students at undergraduate and masters level in higher education. the programme aims at strengthening cooperation in the longterm between universities in a developing country and in sweden to their mutual benefit. university west has two partner universities within the linnaeuspalme programme  one in namibia and one in south africa.
 nordplus higher education programme is the nordic council of ministers programme for educational cooperation between the nordic countries. the programme builds on cooperation in networks offering activities such as student and teacher exchanges.
 mfs minor field studies is a scholarship programme for field studies in developing countries funded by the swedish international development cooperation agency sida. it targets university and college students who have international interests and who wish to gather material for an undergraduate or postgraduate dissertation.
 bilateral agreements with partner universities
 university west has so called bilateral cooperation agreements with several universities in china australia south america and the unites states. the agreement implies that students either dont have to pay the tuition fee at all or are granted a reduced tuition fee.
 university west is the member of a network called isep  international student exchange program. over 300 universities all over the world are members in this network. for university west the membership in this network thus enlarges the number of partner universities especially in the united states.
 partner university information
 on this web page we have listed useful information for our partner instiutions such as quick facts academic calendar courses offered in english and much more.
 nomination information
 we accept nominations through online form only.nomination datesstudies starting autumn semester 1st aprilstudies starting spring semester 1st october
 exchange semester at university west
 application information
 dates for application deadline academic calendar and introduction days
 courses in english
 course lists and information on how to select courses over the semester
 university west at a glance
 university west is a medium sized university located in the southcentral parts of sweden close to the west coast and close to gothenburg the second largest city in sweden.
 86 percent of our students are established in the labor market within 1  15 year after graduating and we have the highest level of students with from? a nonacademic background in sweden.
 more inforamtion
 presentation university west.pdf
 ph profil
 wace european iso and edinburgh napier university are pleased to invite you to a european work integrated learning wil event
 coeducating for the future opportunities and challenges of workintegrated education.
 in may waceiso held a seminar at edinburgh napier university. the topic of the seminar was opportunities and challenges of workintegrated education.
 testimonialsthe waceiso seminar held at edinburgh napier university was both thoughtprovoking and productive. the opportunity to reflect on our work in scotland around graduate apprentice degrees in the context of mature models of workintegrated learning across europe was of great benefit for participants.  the participation of academics and senior policy officers made for some very engaging discussions which we will continue over the months to come.dr colin smithschool of computingedinburgh napier university
 workintegrated learning enable students pathways to employment  some perspectives on students teachers and the societal role
 in january waceiso held a seminar at university of portoportugal on workintegrated learning and the challenges of enablestudents pathways to employment.  the discussion were loud and energizingproblematizing student and teachers role in the new worklife.testimonials i want to take the opportunity to thank you for a wellorganized and thoughtful seminar. your leadership as well as the content made the presentations very provoking. congratulations on the very important work that you do.dr. eduardo j. padronpresidentmiami dade collegethe wace iso seminar on workintegrated learning enable students pathways to employment was a great experience. the seminar with keynote presentations and subsequent group discussions was an ideal way to learn from each other and share experiences with colleagues from other universities and get to know how wil is implemented in other countries. learning from your peers is very inspiring and especially the mix of theory from the reading list provided before the seminar and the best practices shared during the seminar was very beneficial. in addition it was also a good networking event and i already look forward to the next seminar. brigitte ilg director international office dhbw heidenheim
 patrick kankam  alumnus from south africa
 why did you apply to us at university west and to this programme?
 i want to become an international businessman trading all over the world so i needed a study environment with international exposure. i found sweden to be the best place for this. i was also looking for a oneyear masters programme and the master in international business at university west was the best option.
 how have you experienced studying at university west?
 what is the most exciting you have done during the studies? tell us about that.
 i managed to enroll myself to learn the swedish language which was very exciting. i have also applied for an internship programme at some international companies here in sweden. i am waiting to hear back from them now and im hoping to be able to start the internship once i am done with my studies at university west.
 can you describe the environment and culture at the unviersity? what do you think about the student life in trollhättan?
 trollhättan is a small city with a small population. the city is not crowded and it is beautiful with much nature and water. its easy to study and learn in this environment.
 university west is located the heart of trollhattan city and it is a culture diverse university where you can find students from all over the world. including students from america it is not common to find americans attaining their degrees from sweden but they do at university west.
 the student union organizes events every thursday evening so that both the swedish and international students can meet up and have fun. from trollhättan its only a 40minute train ride to gothenburg the second largest city in sweden. the students also often go there to have fun and tour around.
 what are you up to when you are not studying?
 me and a group of international students have formed a football club so we play football on our spare time. there are also other clubs that students can join like cricket tennis and many more.
 i want to become one of the worlds most renowned businessmen where i do business both online and in many different countries all over the world. i also dream of working with football management since its one of the riches markets in the world.
 algebra ringar moduler graderade ringar category theory fuzzy mathematics.
 simplicity of algebras via epsilonstrong systems
 noncommutatively graded algebras
 epsilonstrongly groupoidgraded rings the picard inverse category and cohomology
 simple graded rings nonassociative crossed products and cayleydickson doublings
 simplicity of ore monoid rings
 epsilonstrongly graded rings separability and semisimplicity
 artinian and noetherian partial skew groupoid rings
 fuzzy crossed product algebras
 simple semigroup graded rings
 simple skew category algebras associated with minimal partially defined dynamical systems
 vonneumann finiteness and reversibility in some classes of nonassociative algebras
 arc length of function graphs via taylors formula
 poissons fundamental theorem of calculus via taylors formula
 group gradations on leavitt path algebras
 partial category actions on sets and topological spaces
 a proof of the law of sines using the law of cosines
 outer partial actions and partial skew group rings
 a proof of the cosine addition formula using the law of cosines
 limits of fuzzy categories
 a unique programme in welding technology
 welding technology is a broad field covering everything from materials science to additive manufacturing. and this competence is highly sought after by many companies within various fields such as aerospace construction automotive and more. with this in mind professor paul kah have created an entirely new and unique programme that offers students both practical and theoretical knowledge.
 professor in welding technology paul kah came to europe from cameroon in 2005 to get a second masters degree. he knew that he wanted an education that would make it easy for him to find a job back in africa or in europe. so he went to finland to study a masters programme welding technology.
 when choosing to study welding i knew that i easily could pick up a job after graduating says professor kah.
 for professor kah being able to share his knowledge was a huge motivation.
 i wanted to be able to help developing counties he explains. i used to see damaged welded structures in multiple occasion. you could always see that structures had been welded and that they had fractured in the joints. so this was always in the back of my mind.
 you see welding technology is not only about actual welding like the name implies it also entails materials science and quality inspection. two very important parts of the field of study.
 having seen the welded broken structures and the needs of the industry professor kah have now created an entirely new programme  in welding technology.
 the program itself aims to contribute to the continuous development in industry and industrial competence. to ensure a better control of welding processes and material science and to improve quality production time productivity and innovation professor kah explains.
 and in no other university can you find a programme like this.
 after graduating the students gets both a masters degree and an international welding engineer certificate professor kah explains. it becomes quite unique because you get a master of science and a technology certificate. in other programmes the students will get either or but nowhere else can you get both.
 this combination of a masters degree and a technology certificate makes it possible for the students to continue their studies after graduation but it also gives them an advantage when applying for jobs within the field of welding. you see most companies require an international welding engineer certificate in addition to a masters degree.
 programmes that dont have these double qualifications often require students to take a separate course to get this international welding engineer certificate  which is quite expensive professor kah explains. so this programme reduces the students costs for their studies.
 a great demand for knowledge in welding technology
 there is a great demand for engineers with production technology expertise and specialised knowledge in welding technology. many companies have expressed great interest in this new programme.
 companies such as gkn aerospace saab aeronautics scania and volvo has been involved in building up the programme. in that way these companies have been able to express their needs in order to help create a relevant programme syllabus. it was quite important that before we start up this programme we actually let companies comment on the content. so that they are satisfied says professor kah. this gives our students the guarantee that after graduation they can be integrated in companies without any problems.
 and since the programme is fully taught in english it calls for international collaboration with other companies as well.
 this close collaboration with industry and international focus makes the programme special and the students highly sought after. and when finishing this programme they can go directly to work in a variety of fields.
 the students can get work at any companies that deal with steel structures says professor kah. vehicles construction offshore structures steel piping transporting gas or oil shipbuilding companies aerospace industry.
 the list goes on.
 broad knowledge and practical experience
 as mentioned above  welding technology is not only about the actual welding. its a much broader field of study than the name implies. materials science quality control design of steel structures and additive manufacturing processes are some examples of subjects included in the new programme.
 the broad spectrum of subjects is combined with a lot of practical elements.
 the practical elements are one of the most important parts of the entire programme professor kah explains. most engineers want to have hands on experience in welding. so we have incorporated a lot of practical elements to help the students to get actual knowledge of how it is to weld.
 this gives the students the guarantee that after graduation they can be integrated in companies without any problems professor paul kah concludes.
 i have vast experience of teaching during which time i have delivered courses at masters and doctoral level on subjects like modern welding processes sustainable welding production weldability of materials and welding automation. in addition to university teaching i also gained valuable teaching experience while delivering international welding engineerspecialist iweiws courses in finland nigeria and cameroon. i have acted as supervisor to masters students and doctoral students working in areas such as adaptive intelligence welding systems weld performance and dissimilar weld quality weld quality control and management system modelling weldability of hss and welding of aluminium.
 welding technology process control in welding sustainable welding weld quality assurance high strength steels aluminium dissimilar welding.
 numerical and experimental investigations of mechanical properties of aw 6005t6 aluminium alloy butt weld joint using gmaw process
 benoit ndiwe paul kah francois miterand njock bayock daniel agili uchechukwu harrison onyeji
 characterization of grewia bicolor fibre and its use in the development of composites
 investigation of microstructure and mechanical properties of dissimilar high and ultrahigh steel welded joints  application for extreme climate conditions
 assessment of arc stability features for selected gas metal arc welding conditions
 thermal induced residual stress and microstructural constituents of dissimilar s690qt highstrength steels and 316l austenitic stainless steel weld joints
 feasibility study of welding dissimilar advanced and ultra high strength steels
 optimization of gmaw process parameters in ultrahighstrength steel based on prediction
 laser welding of aluminum battery tab to variable alcu busbars in liion battery joint
 submerged arc welding process peculiarities in application for arctic structures
 advancements in intelligent gas metal arc welding systems  fundamentals and applications
 experimental review on friction stir welding of aluminium alloys with nanoparticles
 staff member at division of psychology pedagogy and sociology human resources.
 after studies and work in cameroon finland and russia paul kah has chosen to work as a professor of welding technology at högskolan väst. i enjoy the nordic lifestyle says paul. photo university west.
 since high school i have been interested in welding and wanted to understand how constructions are fabricated and why some fail. when i arrived in finland to study for a second masters degree in technology i was fascinated to witness how welding is critical to the manufacturing sector. this insight helped me focus on welding because of my hopes for a future career in europe and my experiences in cameroon when i graduated.
 what is your background?
 i obtained a professional masters degree certificate dipet ii from enset at the university of douala cameroon in 2001. then i furthered my studies in europe and graduated from lappeenranta university of technology finland with an msc tech. in 2007 and dsc tech. in 2011. i also hold an international welding engineering diploma accredited by the international institute of welding.
 upon completing my doctoral degree i was awarded a postdoc grant from the academy of finland for three years which allowed me to work as a principal investigator on several interesting projects. from 2016 to 2017 i spent six months as a senior scientist at saint petersburg peter the great polytechnic university. i am currently working as a professor in welding technology and programme director at the department of engineering science university west.
 is there an area you would like to explore more?
 how come you have chosen to work in sweden and at university west?
 i enjoy the lifestyle in the nordic area where there is a good balance between working hard and having time for family and friends. people in sweden are treated with honesty and respect reflected in their workplace behaviour. the swedish tradition of fika coffee and cake is one that other countries could copy. i thoroughly recommend considering sweden as a destination for study or work.
 contact paul kah professor in welding technology university west
 pavan bhaskar named global swede from university west
 pavan bhaskar from india who is pursuing a masters degree in manufacturing engineering has been named this years global swede from university west. pavan along with global swedes from other swedish universities were recognized during a digital ceremony earlier today.
 the students who this year came from 17 different countries have excelled in areas linked to innovation and entrepreneurship and proved to be good representatives of both sweden and their own country.
 receiving the global swede award for 2021 is a great honour for me. my supervisor deserves a lot of credit for recognizing my efforts and nominating me for this award. i would like to express my gratitude to my friends and family who assisted me in getting to this point says a happy pavan bhaskar.
 according to pavan during his time in sweden he has discovered new ways to both understand and learn things. the time at university west has also led to a greater understanding of different cultures.
 university west provides workintegrated learning which is a phenomenal opportunity for a student to have handson experience during their course. workintegrated learning helps in preparing futureready students says pavan.
 the university submitted the following endorsement of mr. bhaskar to the organizers
 during his time at university west pavan bhaskar has gained great knowledge on different subjects and worked on various projects that has helped him to improve his technical skills. he firmly believes in teamwork and helping others to increase his own understanding. he has worked as an sileader to help junior students and as a coordinator for an international conference emerging trends in science and engineering.
 this is the eleventh year in a row that the swedish ministry for foreign affairs and the swedish institute organize the global swede ceremony. according to the organizers the purpose is to recognize foreign students and their importance as ambassadors for sweden as well as to inspire students to maintain the relationship with sweden and their university after completing their studies.
 the ceremony was attended by minister for foreign trade anna hallberg and madeleine sjöstedt director general of the swedish institute.
 payments to university west
 information about payments to university west.
 payments within sweden
 customer invoices are paid to the universitys bankgiro number for ocr payments
 payments from abroad
 payment of tuition fees must be made to a different bank account. the bank details are stated on the invoice sent to the student.
 the universitys corporate identity number
 the subproject aims to increase pedagogical competence and flexibility in digital examinations. it must review all digital examinations with a pedagogical approach. this means identifying areas for improvement spreading good examples and training teachers in  a new system for digital examination.
 in the subproject an educational strategy has been developed to provide teachers with good support during training in the inspera system support. the trainings and strategy have been implemented for the teachers involved in the pilots during spring 2023 and subsequently evaluated. the training consists of a mandatory selfstudy course in canvas followed by a workshop. in addition guidance and ict dropins will be offered to the teachers.
 two new workshops have been launched one workshop to review course design abc workshop for course design. and a workshop that deals with ai and generative language models for beginners.
 in the spring of 2024 a podcast in swedish was launched. the podcast is called akademuspodden and deals with various higher education pedagogical issues and includes teachers at högskolan väst. the goal is to release a new episode per month with different themes.
 whats coming up?
 building new pages for ai and generative language models. a working group has been set up at akademus consisting of ict educators teaching librarians and writing tutors. keep an eye on akademus.
 9 januari crossing boundaries teaching sensitive topics to international student groups
 artikeln går att nå här chatgpt bullshit spewer or the end of traditional assessments in higher education?  journal of applied learning and teaching sfu.ca
 educationsupervision
 i have more than 20 years of national and international teaching experience at undergraduate as well as postgraduate level giving lectures and courses in sweden south africa switzerland uk ireland australia usa norway denmark tanzania uganda and kenya. fields of teaching includes primarily the subjects of human  economic geography political science and social science with topics such as regional geography africa demography  migration global production  trade international political economy rural development local economic development led tourism geography development in theory  practice political ecology theory  methodology time geography european politics and work integrated learning wil
 i have over the years also gained extensive experience as supervisor to honoursmasterphd projects at institutions in sweden university west linköping university göteborg university and south africa rhodes university university of the western cape  uwc. i have also been examiner committee member for phd degrees at various universities.
 i have developed and implemented a number of new university programmes in sweden and south africa. i currently hold positions as
 programme director for the international programme for politics  economics ippe university west
 programme director for the master programme in international politics university west
 extraordinary associate professor department of political studies uwc
 visiting professor geography department rhodes university south africa
 university west coordinator for sanord southern africa nordic centre
 external expertevaluator  swedish council for higher education
 timegeography rural development sustainable development internationalisation development theory integration migration politicaleconomy work integrated learning.
 publications selection
 assmo p. 2005 creative clusters  ideas and realities for cluster growth. the example of film i väst in the region of västra götaland sweden. in karlsson johansson  stough  industrial clusters and interfirm networks. new horizons in regional science. edward elgar publishing cheltenham
 fox r.  assmo p. and h. kjellgren 2008 role playing african development an international comparison. the journal of independent teaching and learning. volume 3. 2008.
 assmo p. 2010 creative industries and regional economic development  the example of public supported regional film centres in sweden. in karlsson johansson  stough entrepreneurship and regional development. local processes and global patterns. new horizons in regional science. edward elgar publishing cheltenham uk.
 assmo p.  wihlborg e. 2010 home the arena for sustainable development  a conceptual discussion.the international journal of environmental cultural economic and social sustainability volume 6 issue 1 pp.319332. common ground publishing.
 assmo p.  wihlborg e. 2012 an alternative view of integrated sustainable development through a timespatial lens. in oida international journal of sustainable development vol. 03 no. 12 pp. 8796 2012.
 assmo p.  wihlborg e. 2012 public services choices when there are no alternatives?  a paradox of new public management in rural areas. journal of rural and community development. vol 7 no 2 p. 117.
 assmo p.  wihlborg e. 2012 local alternative development through a timespatial lens a case study of ydre inspired by hägerstrand. in entrepreneurship social capital and governance.  directions for the sustainable development and competitiveness of regions. johansson b. karlsson c.  stough r. r. eds. london edward elgar publications.
 assmo p.  wihlborg e. 2014home an alternative timespatial concept for sustainable development. in transitions to sustainability theoretical debates for a changing planet. d. humphreys  s. stober eds. london common grounds publishing.
 assmo p.  fox r. 2015 international collaboration for pedagogical innovation understanding multiracial interaction through a timegeographic appraisal. pp 207227. in knowledge for a sustainable world  a southern africannordic contribution. ed halvorsen t ibsen h  mkumbuzi r. sanord  african minds cape town.
 assmo p. 2015a timegeographic appraisal for local sustainable development.the international journal of environmental cultural economic and social sustainability. annual review volume 10 2014. pp. 1526. common ground publishing.
 assmo p.  wihlborg e. 2016 political entrepreneurship and sustainable growth in rural areas. in political entrepreneurship  regional growth and entrepreneurial diversity in sweden. eds. karlsson silander  silander. cheltenham uk edward elgar publications.
 assmo p.  winman t. forthcoming work integrated learning through an rd project. a case study of students participation in a health promoting integration project at university west.
 assmo p. forthcominga timespatial approach to analyse migrants micromigration and settlement patterns.
 development of international collaborations in wil for postgraduate and phd programmes
 transgressions and transformations at work  towards a social media practice among swedish municipality communicators
 political entrepreneurship and sustainable growth in rural areas
 per assmo elin wihlborg
 per assmo elin wilhborg
 from global to local
 a timespatial approach towards integrated sustainable development
 home the arena for sustainable development  a conceptual discussion
 creative industry cluster growth for regional development  illustrations from sweden
 creative industrial development for regional economic growth  the example of regional film centres in sweden.
 international collaboration in the new wil phd programme at university west
 per assmo thomas winman marie vesterlind
 taking care seriously  transforming practices by design
 work integrated learning through an rampd project  a case study of participants learning processes in an integration project between uddevalla municipality and university west sweden
 thomas winman per assmo
 a timegeographic appraisal for local sustainable development
 international collaboration for pedagogical innovation  understanding multiracial interaction through a timegeographic appraisal
 local alternative development through a timespatial lens  a case study of ydre inspired by hägerstrand
 an alternative timespatial approach towards postmonetarism
 turning timespatial modes  an alternative perspective to integrate environmentaleconomic processes of change
 beyond the economic meanings of development  a discussion of politicalgeographical constructions of societal development
 creative industry cluster growth in a global economy  the example of film in väst sweden
 head of department
 thermal spraying high temperatures.
 advanced coatings by thermal spray processes
 comparative study of the corrosion and cavitation resistance of hvof and hvaf fecrmnsini and fecrmnsib coatings
 hot corrosion behavior of multilayer suspension plasma sprayed gd2zr2o7ysz thermal barrier coatings
 bilayer thermal spray coatings  a critical approach to extend the servicelife of metallic components
 a synchrotron xray diffraction deconvolution method for the measurement of residual stress in thermal barrier coatings as a function of depth
 a comparative study on nibased coatings prepared by hvaf hvof and aps methods for corrosion protection applications
 failure analysis of gd2zr2o7ysz multilayered thermal barrier coatings subjected to thermal cyclic fatigue
 corrosion performance of bilayer nicr2c3nicr hvaf thermal spray coating
 corrosion behavior of hvaf and hvofsprayed highchromium febased coatings
 characterization of microstructure and thermal properties of ysz coatings obtained by axial suspension plasma spraying asps
 ashish ganvir nicholas curry stefan björklund nicolaie markocsan per nylén
 a comparative study on the performance of suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings with different bond coat systems
 applications of thermal spray technology for aerospace and automotive industry
 fatigue performance of tbc on structural steel exposed to cyclic bending
 adhesion strength of hvof sprayed in718 coatings
 characterization of cold lap defects in tandem arc mag welding
 effect of heat treatment on low conductive thermal barrier coatings
 characterization of adhesion strenght of hvof sprayed in718 coatings
 a parameter study of the protal process to optimise the adhesion of ni5al coatings
 duplex thermal spray coatings  a critical approach to extend the servicelife of metallic components
 hot corrosion behavior of multilayer suspension plasma sprayed gd2zr2o7 ysz thermal barrier coatings
 fatigue testing of tbc on structural steel by cyclic bending
 corrosion behavior of highchromium febased coatings produced by hvaf thermal spraying technique
 characterization and understanding of residual stresses in a nicocraly bond coat for thermal barrier coating application
 y. chen x. zhao y. dang ping xiao nicholas curry nicolaie markocsan per nylén
 comparative study of suspension plasma sprayed and suspension high velocity oxyfuel sprayed ysz thermal barrier coatings
 ashish ganvir nicholas curry nicolaie markocsan per nylén filofteialaura toma
 erratum  residual stresses distribution through thick hvof sprayed inconel 718 coatings  journal of thermal spray technology doi 10.1007s116660089242 9
 christophe lyphout per nylén a. manescu t. pirling
 characterization of thermomechanical properties for thermal sprayed nicocraly coatings
 characterization of adhesion strenght and residual stresses of hvof sprayed inconel 718 for aerospace repair applications
 christophe lyphout per nylén j. wigren
 effect of thermal aging on microstructure and functional properties of zirconiabase thermal barrier coatings
 nicolaie markocsan per nylén j. wigren x. h. li a. tricoire
 effect of grit blasting and spraying angle on the adhesion strength of a plasmasprayed coating
 maureen drysdaleprofessor i psykologi university of waterloo och st. jeromes university kanada
 avdelningschef grantsand innovation office gio
 i provide guidance on library resourses information retrieval and reference management at the physical and digital information points of the library and at teaching sessions and workshops held by the library.
 user surveys and development of the library room are other parts of my job as are interlibrary loans and acquisition of literature.
 academic background
 doctorate degree phd psychology licentiate degree in work and personality psychology advanced level pedagogy 90hp master of science in social psychology 300hp
 scholar profile latest scientific work
 social psychology. personality and deviance. group psychology. social psychiatry. work and organizational psychology. intelligence. subjective wellbeing. personality traits gfp big five.
 phase transformations in metals and alloys parttime campus fml700
 the course in phase transformations in metals and alloys includes a lecture series that covers the main issues of the course. a number of seminars will be held. before these events the students will prepare answers to several questions these will then be presented weekly in front of the course attendees.
 philip mcgeough hänninen  irland
 any student who has been admitted to the thirdcycle programme in work integrated learning wil or production technology is qualified.
 phone counseling  substance abuse
 phone counceling  substance abuse
 as a student at univeristy west you can get free phone counseling regarding abuse of alcohol medicines or narcotics via the aleforsstiftelsen.
 you can call regardless of whether its about yourself a friend or a relative or if you have more general questions. your call is completely anonymous if you want it to be
 to get phone counceling call 02022 12 00
 individualized blended care for patients with colorectal cancer  the patients view on informational support.
 participation in parental group support offered by the child health service in sweden  a qualitative study
 difficulties experienced by men during the first year after their myocardial infarction and fatigue
 l. nordqvist s. thorn pia alsén ina berndtsson
 measuring fatigue with the multidimensional fatigue inventory mfi20 in persons treated for myocardial infarction
 mens experience of difficulties during first year following myocardial infarction  not onlyfatigue
 illness perceptions of fatigue and the association with sense of coherence and stress in patients one year after myocardial infarction.
 illness perception and fatigue after myocardial infarction
 paria karimi has developed strategies that make it possible to design a microstructure with more homogeneous properties. this can provide great benefits for manufacturers of aircraft engine components.
 over the past ten years industry has increasingly shown interest in additive manufacturing am using electron beam as the heat source. products with this layeronlayer manufacturing principle have many advantages and create completely new opportunities for many industries.
 with additive manufacturing techniques it will be feasible to produce lighter and more complex components in one processing step. this leads to more efficient and environmentally friendly aircraft engines says paria karimi who defended her dissertation at university west in december.
 paria has delved into how the electron beampowder bed fusion ebpbf process works for the production of components made of alloy 718 a material of great interest for the aerospace industry. moreover the ebpbf process is very interesting for companies that manufacture customized components in small series such as medical implants. if you can develop the manufacturing process optimally there is an enormous gain both in production time and material costs.
 complex production in a single step
 the goal of using additive manufacturing techniques is to be able to manufacture more complex yet lighter and stronger components in a single step. today production is still done in several steps and often with a need for post processing which is both timeconsuming and costly.
 through a long series of tests she investigated how tight the components can be built how high they can be and so on without losing their properties. furthermore she did significant work with the machines process parameters to reduce component defects.
 greater flexibility in the design work
 lastly i investigated how to tailor specific properties of the material by controlling different process parameters during manufacturing. it was probably the most difficult and at the same time the most exciting part of my job says paria. i have developed strategies that make it possible to design a microstructure with more homogeneous properties. this means that the metal can behave exactly the same regardless of the direction of the stresses and loads it is exposed to. this can provide great benefits for manufacturers of aircraft engine components as it gives them greater flexibility in the design work.
 paria notes that there are still some challenges in the final properties of asbuilt products such as surface quality which requires postprocessing of products manufactured with ebpbf.
 the requirements for finishing are of course different depending on what the component is to be used for. but in general it can be said that this process so far does not deliver a one hundred per cent finished part.
 valuable input from the industry
 we met regularly to present results and received valuable input in the form of insight and comments from the industrial companies.
 a lot has happened in parias life over the past year. just 47 days before the dissertation she gave birth to a girl and shortly afterwards she got a postdoc position at waterloo university. in april the whole family moves to canada.
 link to paria karimis dissertation electron beampowder bed fusion of alloy 718 effect of process parameters on microstructure evolution
 plan for gender mainstreaming at university west
 the plan for the universitys gender mainstreaming work is part of the strategy for sustainable development. the plan includes prioritized goals and initiatives for the period 20232025.
 based upon experience and the compiled evaluations from the previous programme period for work on gender mainstreaming as well as results of the studies that have been done the need for continued prioritization and more projects has been identified. taken together the results show that during the next two years the university needs to focus on gender mainstreaming in the following areas
 a work and study environment free from genderbased victimization intimidation violations and sexual harassment
 an equal distribution of power resources and opportunities between the genders
 undergraduate and post graduate programmes that support gender equality
 support of processes and tools that bring about change
 to further reinforce schemes for and the effect of our efforts it is important to introduce gender equality issues and methodology into development projects that are ongoing or will be offered in the future at the university and to do so on a regular basis. this applies to projects involving the whole university as well as limited or local projects. during the upcoming period our work on gender mainstreaming will primarily be focused on the following projects
 the development of the universitys management
 the campus expansion project and societal impact hub
 broadened recruitment and participation inclusive teaching
 here you will find the plan in its entirety
 university wests focus for working with gender mainstreaming 20232025.pdf
 planned downtime w3d3
 we are upgrading our system w3d3 so the registry will be closed
 w3d3 will be up and running again on thursday the 12.
 planned maintenance for hvdesktop our remote computer labs
 today we will be conducting planned maintenance and updates on our remote computer labs.
 thank you for your understanding and cooperation.
 planned maintenance of hv play
 working life is a part of my education.
 masters in robotics
 heres a list of podcast tips to check out when you have a moment to spare
 teach online podcast  the teaching online podcast topcast takes a fun and informative look at the various trends best practices and technologies in the realm of online education.
 teaching in higher ed  explore the art and science of being more effective at facilitating learning.
 have a nice summer
 the broad scientific goal is to develop a basic understanding of the connections between processes microstructure and properties. this can in the long run lead to that the production of components with powder bedbased additive manufacturing in metal pbfam become reliable and meet industrial quality requirements. the strategy is to include various aspects of manufacturing postprocessing and mechanical properties through conventional as well as emerging nondestructive techniques and modeling development.
 podfam stands for powder bed fusion additive manufacturing of metals for gas turbine applications.
 news articles
 policy advice in electoral democracies  think tanks in hungary and poland
 we aim to study how expert bodies such as think tanks have contributed to and partake both in the formation of and the resistance to the autocratization trend in central europe with a focus on poland and hungary.
 recent accounts of the state of democracy in the world report an increasing trend of democratic backsliding. this autocratization trend has also taken root in the western world e.g. in the us and in central europe e.g. poland hungary.
 while significant scholarship exists on why democracies break down much less is known about how they backslide and how these regimes consolidate. we focus on think tanks in the interest of conceptualizing the dynamic interplay between governments and policy advice in the construction of political knowledge production in electoral democracies i.e. countries where elections are reasonably free and fair but constitutional guarantees such as rule of law and civil liberties such as freedom of association or freedom of expression are circumvented.
 how and in what capacities was institutional policy advice drawn upon in the turn towards electoral democracy in hungary after 2010 in poland after 2015?
 how are policy advisors  both those supporting and resisting the changes  relating to governments in pursue of electoral democracy?
 policy for sustainable development
 here you can read university wests policy for sustainable development in its entirety.
 the universitys work with sustainable development and agenda 2030 is thus a pervasive project for change and quality assurance at all levels. it involves coworkers students and collaboration partners. the aim is to achieve a sustainable culture in which sustainable development and global goals are a natural point of departure. wideranging collaboration creates the basis for sustainable solutions that integrate the social economic and ecological dimensions of sustainability. the sustainability project at our university is also a tool in our efforts to defend and protect democratic values.
 university wests overarching goals for sustainable development are to
 offer a highquality education that grounded in scientific method develops students ability to contribute to sustainable development.
 encourage and provide employees and students with the resources for working toward sustainable development.
 collaborate with partners who are working toward sustainable development and initiate collaboration in this area.
 integrate social ecological and economic sustainability into the universitys support processes as well as the physical premises.
 the efforts made toward these goals are grounded in scientific method collaboration with our students and various external actors as well as systematic sustainability leadership. university west should be an institution known for practicing what it preaches taking preventative measures always trying to improve and one that follows applicable legislation. it is a question of credibility and requires a declaration of commitment from the universitys leadership as well as active cooperation from the universitys employees and students.  annual planning takes place according to a decisionmaking process that is outlined in the management system and where the policy that has been decided upon is clarified in the universitys strategy for sustainable development.
 this course studies the history and the theories of sexuality and gender from a political perspective. it is one the one hand side focused on providing a historical description of certain important discursive shifts in the relation between state sexuality and gender. during this theme students get acquainted with a variety of ways to organize this relation at different times and in different societies. on the other hand the course focuses on theoretical approaches to sexuality and gender and on normative theories about the relation between the two and the state.
 this course is an overview of manifestations of political violence originating from modern states as well as nonstate actors. the first part of the course will focus on state violence in the form of warmaking against other states mass violence against individuals such as genocide and ethnic cleansing as well as structural violence toward particular groups within a state including race and genderbased violence conducted sponsored or enabled by the state. the second part of the course will focus on political violence perpetrated by nonstate actors in civil wars mass protests rebellions or in the form of terrorism. in the third part of the course we will turn to the social psychology of political violence how regular individuals become perpetrators of political violence in different contexts.
 the course is given in english.
 popcorn  plug  produce with configurable resources inspired by natural language
 the vision of popcorn plug  produce with configurable resources inspired by natural language is to obtain flexible production systems where the changeover time for new product variants can be measured in minutes rather than months for automated applications.
 the expected industrial effect is a more balanced work environment for operators where ergonomically unsustainable tasks can be replaced by automation. expected outcome from the project is a planning and control software for operatorrobot assisted assembly based on the ontology.
 artificial intelligence is a promising technique to handle high flexibility from a control perspective. however the industrial challenge is to program such an artificial intelligencebased controller that serves a plug  produce production system. the novelty of popcorn is that it addresses how to configure plug  produce controllers based on natural language implying that programming can be avoided.
 popcorn is in line with initiatives such as industry 4.0 smart factories cyber physical systems artificial intelligence and digitalisation which are aiming for a paradigm shift in the abilities and possibilities for production technology. international standards for automation such as automationml will be evaluated compared and utilised. popcorn will provide the industrial community with a configuration tool and an industrial method for plug  produce aimed for short changeover and rapid reconfiguration.
 this course is considered a roadmap for making a successful investment decision for each institutional fund manager as well as for each individual investor. it offers advanced concepts in investment analysis and portfolio management including asset classes financial instruments risk return capital allocation bond portfolio management stock valuation as well as futures options and other derivatives markets. to link theory to practice many features of this course are consistent with and relevant to the cfa curriculum.
 a grant to support travel and accommodation will be awarded to students participating in the course.
 are you interested in releasing your norm creativity and your innovative learning skills about how increased elements of norm consciousness can be a resourceefficient way to strive towards healthcare equality and social sustainability in society?
 would you like to work with students from other european countries and discuss together create and set a track for the future of norm consciousness in relation to health?  do apply to this course
 in the course normconsciousness and health 75 he credits the concerns of healthcare inequity questions of inclusion and diversity and the power structures that work for and against will be scrutinized by utilizing a variety discoverybased aesthetic learning principles in workshops and laboratory group assignments. results from the work shops such as artifacts digital material and other results will create a foundation of the norm lab that will be produced through the course events.
 who can take this course?you need to be enrolled in a program related to health or social work at hv to join the course. you also need to understand and make your self understood in english. five students will be able to participate from university west. students from universities in czech republic portugal who is a part of the breaking fences project will also partic ipate. in total 15 students will join the course in polytechnic institute of bragança portugal.
 creditsthe course will give you 75 ects in the subject of caring after com pletion. preparatory work equivalent to 1 ½ ects will be conducted before the travel to portugal june 1014 with digital course start 24 of april.
 what to do?
 write a short letter and explain why you would like to take part  apply latest 152 2024 by contacting carl fredrik milles in this course including a short presentation of yourself and why carlfredrik.miles@hv.se or henrik eriksson henrik.eriksson@ you are interested in the subject. attached with this you also hv.se. your international coordinator can answer general ques need to provide information about your name date of birth and  tions conserning mobility and student exchange.
 the ladok system is operated at umeå university. due to an ongoing incident at umeå university ladok including ladok for students risks being affected by an operational disruption.
 possible service disruptions in zoom  hv play
 on saturday march 16 the services zoom and hv play kaltura may experience disruptions due to scheduled firewall maintenance at nordunet.the work is scheduled to take place between 0800 am  0900 pm.
 powder bed fusion additive manufacturing  level 2
 increase our understanding of how process parameters affect building speed defects homogeneity microstructure etc. in laser as well as electron beam powder bed am.   increase our understanding of how postprocessing such as heat treatment and hot isostatic pressing influence microstructure and properties.   identification and evaluation of methods that facilitate reliable and adaptive process control.   development of nondestructive testing methods for detecting and characterising defects for measuring and analysing surface topography and with linkage to control of the materials quality. development of physically based simulation models for predicting both microstructure development and accumulated residual stresses linked to observations of temperature history. development of the capability that facilitates the calculation and prediction of properties in ambuilt material based on microstructure and defect populations.
 adegoke o. andersson j. brodin h. pederson r.  harlin p. 2022. influence of laser powder bed fusion process parameters on the microstructure and cracking susceptibility of nickelbased superalloy alloy 247lc. results in materials 13 100256.
 neikter m. edin e. proper s. bhaskar p. nekkalapudi g. k. linde o. ...  pederson r. 2021. tensile properties of 2169 austenitic stainless steel built using laser powderbed fusion. materials 1415 4280.
 goel s. neikter m. capek j. polatidis e. colliander m. h. joshi s.  pederson r. 2020. residual stress determination by neutron diffraction in powder bed fusionbuilt alloy 718 influence of process parameters and posttreatment. materials  design 195 109045.
 neikter m. bhaskar p. singh s. kadoi k. lyphout c. svahn f.  pederson r. 2023. tensile properties of laser powder bed fusion built jbk75 austenitic stainless steel. materials science and engineering a 874 144911.
 pandian k. neikter m. bahbou f. ganvir a. hansson t.  pederson r. 2023. fatigue behavior of lowtemperature hot isostatic pressed electron beam powder bed fusion manufactured ti6al4 v. journal of alloys and compounds 962 171086.
 h2ram  hydrogen embrittlement of advanced additive manufactured components for space rocket applications a vinnova funded project 20232028 this project explores the hydrogen influence on mechanical properties of lbpbf manufactured alloy718 material and includes collaboration with sintef in trondheim norway where hydrogen testing is performed.   hydram  hydrogen embrittlement of advanced am components a ssf funded project 20232027 this project aims at 1 developing capability for characterization of mechanical performance in high pressure hydrogen 2 determine the extent of hydrogen embrittlement of am built alloy 718 at conditions relevant for rocket and aeroengine components 3 determine the mechanisms and develop an understanding for hydrogen embrittlement in am built alloy 718exposed to high pressure hydrogen a collaboration with swerim through a institute phd student.  impacter  insitu xray synchrotron measurements of electron beam powder bed fusion mancfactured nickelbased superalloys 20232025 the overall purpose of this project is to enhance the understanding of the microstructural evolution during additive manufacturing am by powder bed fusionelectron beam pbfeb of the nibased superalloys marm247 and haynes 282.
 sushovan roychowdhury
 powder bed fusion additive manufacturing
 powder bed fusion additive manufacturing contributes to a more sustainable and efficient manufacturing ecosystem aligning with the transition towards environmentally conscious practices.
 powder bed fusion pbf additive manufacturing am also known as 3d printing is a transformative technology with significant sustainability implications. it minimizes material wastage by building objects layer by layer conserving resources and reducing environmental footprints.
 pbf promotes a circular economy by allowing the use of recyclable materials lowering the demand for virgin resources. its design flexibility creates lightweight structures saving energy during transportation and usage. the decentralized nature of pbf reduces carbon emissions from longdistance transportation and supports local economies.
 moreover pbf consolidates multiple components into integrated structures simplifying assembly processes and lowering energy consumption.
 robert pederson professor in materials engineering university west
 per nylén professor in production technology university west
 this is a strategic investment of great interest for the aerospace industry
 joel andersson professor in material engineering university west
 thematic leader  powder bed fusion additive manufacturing
 power electronics parttime campus kre600
 the course covers the basic principles for power electronics used in electric vehicles. an understanding is created for design and operation of the most common converters selfcommutated converters direct current converters as well as onephase and threephase voltage source converters. also control and calculation of losses are covered in the course.
 here youll find information about a number of practicalities.
 living costs in sweden are similar to most european countries and depend largely on your individual lifestyle. the estimated cost of living for a student is around 8000 sekmonth.
 international students coming to study at university west are offered accommodation arranged by the municipal landlord eidar housing ab or the private landlord hammar nordic ab in cooperation with university west.
 visa and insurance
 students from countries outside the eueea who plan to study in sweden for a period longer than three months must have a residence permit.
 you can reach sweden and trollhättan by plane car bus or train.
 introduction days
 autumn introduction is arranged in order for all new international students at university west to get help on how to get started with their studies.
 faq international students
 frequently asked questions for international students
 pradips advanced simulation model provides deeper understanding of the additive manufacturing process
 for nearly a century gas metal arc has been successfully used in metal fusion process. in recent years this technology is making its way into the world of 3d printing promising exciting advancements in additive manufacturing. pradip aryal shows in his doctoral thesis how an advanced physicsbased simulation model provides deeper understanding of the process unlocking a world of novel applications.
 today the gas metal arc based additive manufacturing is particularly used for production of largescale metallic components like propellers turbine blades and sometime even entire bridge structures. this technology is gaining significant industrial attention due to its high productivity which is often required in practical production to reduce the lead time and overall costs says pradip aryal a recent ph.d. graduate in production technology university west.
 despite its promise this technology can be quite intricate often resulting in various material defects during the production process. a simulation model thus helps in both the process understanding and mechanism behind defect formation while also offering effective solutions for addressing and mitigating these issues says pradip.
 until recently advanced predictive simulation models were lacking mainly due to the oversimplification of the underlying physics within these simulation models.
 simulation models are increasingly becoming an invaluable tool for the manufacturing industry. by simulating the production process in advance it is possible to anticipate potential defects in additive manufacturing process. this not only saves time and money but also significantly reduces material waste.
 to assess the reliability of the model i conducted a series of physical experiments in parallel. the results showed that the simulation model can predict with a high degree of certainty how the process parameters effect the quality of the finished component.
 in addition the simulation model offers the exciting potential to tailor specific material properties in the final product. this opens completely new opportunities for industry to further leverage the gas metal arc to an even greater extent.
 exciting opportunities lie ahead for expanding the models capabilities. these include delving deeper into various aspects of the process such as understanding porosities and cracking defects and finetuning process parameters for precise control of material properties. it is something i would like to explore further in collaboration with a company.
 read pradip aryals doctoral thesis metal fusion using pulsed gas metal arc melt pool modeling and cfd simulation
 contact pradip aryal doctor in production engineering pradip.aryal@hv.se 46 76 281 82 87
 tillgång till officepaketet word excel och powerpoint
 press and media
 press photos
 all graphics and photos in the image archive can be freely used by journalists for editorial purposes. when photos are published please specify the name of the photographer and copyright.
 contact the communications office at webmaster@hv.se if you have problems downloading the images or if you wish to access any image that is not here on the website.
 photos for download links to external website my newsdesk swedish information will follow
 university governing board
 professors
 environment and buildings
 media information and media contacts at university west.
 press room
 press releases and news in swedish
 board professors students etc.
 contact information  press related questions
 previous events
 earlier cat events
 panel discussiona panel discussion on agency and transformation dialogues on motives mediation and motion will take place online building on the recently published book edited by nick hopwood and annalisa sannino for cambridge university press
 whenfebruary 6 tuesday
 panelists  prof nick hopwood university of technology sydney dr brett bligh lancaster university uk  dr yannick lemonie conservatoire national des arts et métiers paris  dr monica lemos university of são paulo brazil prof joce nuttall university of canterbury new zealand prof annalisa sannino tampere university finland
 registration to the event is possible till february 4  registration link
 dear colleagues in response to much demand the summer school on culturalhistorical activity theory in practice will be offered as an intensive in person one week course at the center for activity theory cat university west in trollhättan sweden starting on june 17 2023.
 the course itself does not entail a fee for doctoral students. also for masters students within eu the course is free of charge. the costs for travel and accommodation are however on the participants.
 the official announcement with details on contents and registration will be circulated early in 2024.
 we look forward to an inspiring collective learning experience
 1. chat sig thematic session at fera
 learning and agency for equity and sustainability dialogue with activity theory
 global demands of equity social justice and environmental sustainability urgently require that actors across sectors and levels learn to pursue concerted willful actions which can lead to effective and flexible solutions. understanding how in these conditions learning and agency based on multiple voices of various actors emerge and how they can be sustained is a crucial educational challenge. these issues are at the core of current developments of culturalhistorical activity theory globally and its emerging fourth generation. in this framework the mentioned educational challenges are typically studied with the help of formative interventions such as the change laboratory.
 the thematic group welcomes contributions of all levels  from preliminary to well developed  based on or engaging in dialogue with these theoretical and methodological premises. contributions to the thematic group will be selected to individual sessions based on their specific focus in order to facilitate indepth discussions between presenters as well as the audience during each session.
 submit your abstract max 2000 characters by end of september.
 2. theory and practice in todays society a dialogue between three conceptual frameworks preconference seminar
 the seminar opens with a keynote by professor davide nicolini from university of warwick author of the influential volume practice theory work and organization oxford university press 2012 followed by a discussion with the audience. the seminar will then continue with a panel discussion involving professor ulf blossing and docent lill langelotz from university of gothenburg and professor annalisa sannino from tampere university with commentaries by the keynote speaker professor nick hopwood from university of technology sydney and by professor mervi kaukko from tampere university. the seminar is chaired by university lecturer phd jaakko hilppö from university of helsinki.
 the preseminar will take place online on the afternoon 22nd november finnish time gmt3 and is freeofcost.register for the seminar via
 3. symposium finnish culturalhistorical activity theory current studies and future directions
 the second symposium will end with professor tooms commentary on the studies presented in both symposium parts.
 for more on the symposium see our thematic issue in kasvatus finnish only article summaries in english. full issues  english summaries
 all activities above are part of the annual fera conference this year held in vaasa finland between november 2324 2023. for more on the conference see link below
 chat publicationseminar8 september 1415.3011 october 1415.30
 moocthere are still a few days to register for the tampere university mooc on key concepts of culturalhistorical activity theory chat. the essential information and registration link are available on the course webpage
 please notice that accepting registrations after aug 15th and outside the link will not be possible.
 the mooc is an excellent opportunity to learn about chat for free. credits can also be obtained for participants from different parts of the world. this mooc continues discussions started during a reading seminar series that took place during the academic year 20222023. this mooc however does not require prior knowledge of chat.
 mooca tampere university mooc is being prepared on key concepts of culturalhistorical activity theory chat which will take place in the fall of 2023. the mooc is free of charge and credits can also be obtained for participants from different parts of the world. the registration to the mooc will be possible from august 1st to august 15th on the course webpage.
 please notice that it will not be possible to accept registrations before or after these dates and outside the link which will be provided on this webpage.
 this mooc continues discussions started during a reading seminar series that took place during the academic year 20222023. this mooc however does not require prior knowledge of chat.
 please find a more detailed description of the preseminar and the registration link below.
 on behalf of the fera chat sigannalisa sannino  jaakko hilppö
 theory and practice in todays society a dialogue between three conceptual frameworks
 register for the preseminar via this link
 program for the online reading seminars academic year 20222023
 workshop on ecis2023a highly interesting workshop on activity theory at the european conference on information systems ecis 2023 conference in june in kristiansand norway. the registration is still open for a few days. please take a look.
 welcome to the 8th reading seminar on key concepts from culturalhistorical activity theory
 date 19th april  time 15001700 time in sweden key concept historicity
 this reading seminar focuses of historicity.
 the first article by engstrom identifies theoretical principles in chat where history and historicity are emphasized.
 the second article by lémonie grosstephan and tomás show in what way history becomes incorporated in the analytical work to understand socially pressing issues.
 readings
 yrjö engeström 2001 expansive learning at work toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization journal of education and work 141 133156 doi 10.108013639080020028747
 lémonie yannick grosstephan vincent tomás jeanluc 2021 from a sociological given context to changing practice transforming problematic power relations in educational organizations to overcome social inequalities frontiers in psychology vol. 11
 if you like to participate please register and contribute with your questions by the 17th april at this registration link   email adress and qs.docx
 the zoomlink for the meeting will be sent out to the registered participants email addresses the day before the meeting.
 looking forward to learning together
 activity theory publication seminar
 colleagial writing seminar22 feb 10.0011.3012 apr 13.0014.307 jun 10.0011.30
 summer school activity theory in practice
 the much awaited summer school activity theory in practice organized by university west in sweden will take place also this year as an online series of lectures seminars and meetings starting on week 23 june 6 and ending on week 34 august 25.
 deadline for applying is the 29th of may 2023
 annalisa sannino and helena wallström are initiating series of online reading seminars on foundational concepts in culturalhistorical activity theory chat beginning in the academic year 20222023.
 welcome to the 7th reading seminar on key concepts from culturalhistorical activity theory
 time 13001500 time in cape town
 the germ cell from hegel through marx to current work.
 readings attached  blunden a. 2021. the unit of analysis and germ cell in hegel marx and vygotsky. in hegel marx and vygotsky pp. 3460. brill.
 hedegaard m. 2020. ascending from the abstract to the concrete in school teachingthe double move between theoretical concepts and childrens concepts. psychological science  education 255.
 if you like to participate please register and contribute with 12 questions on the article by the 20th march at this registration link
 change laboratory for educational development and social transformation. presentations and discussions on strengts and challenges
 please see the details of this hybrid event in the poster below with links to the zoom meeting following
 topic trip zoom meetingtime feb 21 2023 0200 pm johannesburg
 resetcradle online seminar series for this academic year.  february 8 wednesday 20002230 beijing  15001730 tamperehelsinki topic redesigning teacher education a change laboratory at capital normal university beijing
 register here for this feb 8 seminar
 brochure of the event  abstract
 reading seminar of the academic year 20222023
 1. hopwood n. 2022. agency in culturalhistorical activity theory strengthening commitment to social transformation. mind culture and activity 292 108122.
 2. sannino a. 2015. the principle of double stimulation a path to volitional action. learning culture and social interaction 6 115.
 if you would like to participate please register in the form in the following link by the 14th of january 2023
 looking forward to meeting with you all
 best regards and happy new year 2023
 welcome to the fourth reading seminar of the academic year 20222023 on key concepts in culturalhistorical activity theory chat.we will meet online the 16th of december from 900 to 1130 am brazil time. this corresponds to 1400 to 1630 finnish time or 1300 to 1530 central european time cet.
 together we will discuss and work on the articleengeström y  sannino a. 2011 discursive manifestations of contradictions in organizational change efforts. journal of organizational change management. 243 368387.
 if you would like to participate please register and answer a question in the form in the following link prior to 9 of december link to registration here
 20221207    20221209 wil conference
 we invite scholars with genuine interdisciplinary perspectives as well as practitioners collaboration partners and actors with crosssector ambitions to take on challenges and opportunities to cocreate a more sustainable world. for more information read here
 20221201 online cl event 7
 sig short descriptionconference website in both finnish and english instructions to submit an abstractconference registration and fees
 when submitting an abstract please make sure to indicate in the appropriate section of the form that you are submitting to the sig 14 learning and agency for equity and sustainability dialogue with activity theory
 20221123 fera chat sig preseminar fostering development and transformation in and beyond the academia with culturalhistorical activity theory
 the preseminar will be held on wednesday 23rd of november between 1215  1545 oclock eastern european standard time gmt2.
 the seminar is free of charge and participation online is possible. please find the program for the seminar and the necessary zoom connection information below.
 1215 opening words and welcome professor annalisa sannino tampere university
 1300 commentary by vesa korhonen docent and senior university lecturer tampere university
 1310 discussion with participants
 presentation by professor annalisa sannino tampere university culturalhistorical activity theory and dialectics for a transformative agency agenda in higher education the example of a formative intervention on academic dishonesty
 1445 discussion on presentations with panelists professor james garraway professor yrjö engeström the presenters and the participants chair phd university lecturer jaakko hilppö university of helsinki
 1545 closing remarks
 2022110809 chat seminars and round table discussions
 most welcome to university weas and join the chat seminars and round table diskussions on campus live.
 for more information please contact maria.spante@hv.se
 20221108 chat reading seminar
 welcome to the third chat reading seminar of the academic year 20222023 on artifacts and instrumentality. the online meeting is scheduled on the 8th of november from 630 to 930 pm paris france.
 together we will discuss the following texts
 ritella g.  hakkarainen k. 2012. instrumental genesis in technologymediated learning from double stimulation to expansive knowledge practices. international journal of computersupported collaborative learning 72 239258. doi10.1007s1141201291441 can be found here.
 if you would like to participate please register and contribute with 12 questions on the texts before november 6 by using the following link
 the zoomlink for the meeting will be sent out to the registered participants email addresses the day before the meeting.
 20221003    20221007lina week at university west read more here
 lina week more information can be found here
 20220922 reading seminar on key concepts in culturalhistorical activity theory
 welcome to the first reading seminar of the academic year 20222023 on key concepts in culturalhistorical activity theory chat. we will meet online the 22nd of september at 1 4 pm swedish time.
 together we discuss the following article engeström y  sannino a. 2020. from mediated actions to heterogenous coalitions four generations of activitytheoretical studies of work and learning. mind culture and activity. 281  423.
 if you like to participate please register and contribute with 12 questions on the article before the 15th of september at the following link link to registration
 20220914 online cl event 6
 invited scholars on campus at university west trollhättan. the seminar is in english.time 1214.  for more information please contact maria spante.
 20220907    20220909 olkc 2022 conference organized by university west sweden
 call for papers deadline to submit extended abstract april 10. more information can be found here
 2022061316 nordicbaltic iscar 2022 conference organized in helsinki
 call for abstracts
 20220602  implementing and developing change laboratories lessons from africa
 the program and invitation attached. the event is free of charge but requires a registration by the 30thof march through this link  the participants registered to the event will receive selected publications to read beforehand and a personal link to access the event.
 cl in africa program_june 2 and 3 2022.pdf
 20220516 seminar and panel discussion on practice theories
 may 16th 16.0018.00 local time in sweden
 according to nicolini 2012 practice theories constitute a rather broad family of theoretical approaches connected by a web of historical and conceptual similarities. there are however also decisive differences between them. this seminar and panel discussion aims to make visible and understandable a what is significant and specific to each of these three examples of practice theories and b how the theories converge and diverge.
 the event are open to all interested  colleagues and students via the following link
 20220511 lecture and discussion on activity theory formative interventions and the change laboratory
 may 11 2022 16001800 local time in sweden
 20220506 developing education and the prerequisites for learning withchat change laboratory and art.
 the seminar is about developing education and the prerequisites for learning withchat change laboratory and art.
 our invited guests anne bationotillon and yannick  lemoine work with culturalhistorical activity theory and welcome dialogue around this theory and related methodology. round table discussion will only be held at university west in trollhättan sweden.10.1511.00 webinar  round table discussion at campus in j111 not at zoom.
 no registration  for more information please contact maria.spante@hv.se
 20220505 work against unequal access to educational success
 the seminar focus on how to work against unequal access to educational success
 our invited guests anne bationotillon and yannick  lemoine work with culturalhistorical activity theory and welcome dialogue around this theory and related methodology. round table discussion will only be held at university west in trollhättan sweden13.1514.00 webinar  round table discussion at campus in j113 not at zoom.
 20220331 developing organizations with culturalhistorical activity theory and viceversa
 seminar with dr jaakko hilppö  from the university of helsinki. summary for the seminarin this talk i will present three lines of ongoing investigation opened by me and my colleagues to develop organizations and practices with the help of culturalhistorical activity theory. throughout my talk i will also discuss how each line of investigation contributes to the ongoing development of culturalhistorical activity theory.
 20220228 online cl event 5
 20211130 online cl event 4
 20211126 fera chat sig
 presentation of collective paper by an international groupe of resarchers about lessons learnt during ongoing adaptations and transrformations when running change laboratories and learning labs online rather then at site.
 20211125 fera chat sig
 20210930 collaborative writing on zoom and google docs
 international groupe of resarchers meet online and write about lessons learnt during ongoing adaptations and transrformations when running change laboratories and learning labs online rather then at site.
 20210928 collaborative writing on zoom and google docs
 20210927 collaborative writing on zoom and google docs
 20210909 online cl event 3
 20211006  webinar with professor clay spinuzzi  from the university of texas at austin usa with the title a typology of different work configurations.
 topic what do teams try to accomplish at work? the question seems simpleuntil you actually observe people working. then it becomes obvious that teams can and usually do try to accomplish many things simultaneously including internal cohesion and dynamics regularly produced outcomes with tight tolerances armslength transactions and creative problemsolving. that is to say they often have multiple objects and these imply different activities and thus different configurations for work.
 here we will discuss a typology for understanding such objects the work configurations that they necessitate and the tensions across these work configurations. we will examine changes in labor over the past 50 years that have led to current work configurations and we will look at cases that illustrate them. finally we will discuss ways to intervene at the level of activity addressing organizationlevel disruptions.
 20210504 online cl event 2
 20210309 online cl event 1
 the release party of activity theory centre  13th of august 2021
 a grand opening of the activity theory centre took place with our vice chancellor  martin hellström to celebrate the opening of the centre.on link was professor yrjö engström university of helsinki finland and professor annalisa sannino tampere university finland.in the studio was associate professor kristina johansson vice chancellor martin hellström professor lars svensson and professor ulrika lundh snis.
 the university west campus is bustling with international students. this week introductions are being held for nearly 400 students who have come from all over the world to study at the university this fall.
 primula  problem with login
 we are currently having problems logging into primula. this has been reported as an error and we hope that it will be fixed soon.
 primula cannot be accessed due to interruption with external supplier. tietoevry is working on the problem
 primula cannot be accessed due to interruption with external supplier. tietoevry is working on the problem.
 there is currently an outage in primula work to resolve the issue is ongoing.
 primula not available at 1820 tonight 27 feb.
 this is due to an extra service window.
 industrial workintegrated learning iwil
 thermal spray
 powder bedbased additive manufacturing
 welding and weldingbased additive manufacturing
 advanced nondestructive testing and evaluation
 watch a film in which primus programme manager lennart malmsköld explains more.
 how do you want to cooperate with us?
 the smart industry sweden industrial graduate school
 this is swedens largest industrial graduate school within smart industry. it offers an excellent opportunity for businesses to build cuttingedge expertise and to strengthen their competitiveness in readiness for the challenges of the future. university west and four other educational institutions run the industrial graduate school together with businesses.
 university west offers a number of options for professionals who want to continue their professional development. this includes both contract education and free short courses that can be combined with work and are developed in close cooperation with businesses.
 find out more
 our objectives vision and work organisation
 develop new knowledge together  with students
 let students carry out their degree projects at your company
 partners about collaborating with primus
 as an industry partner we get the opportunity to showcase what we do
 collaboration with university west opens doors
 courses for professionals are valuable in scanias technological shift.
 cecilia axelsson engineering manager scania
 sourabh brings knowledge and new perspectives
 claes haraldsson manager tooltec
 senior lecturer                        programchef primus phd production technology
 prince ken osei   student from ghana
 why did you apply to us at university west and why msc in international business?
 i chose university west because of the practical aspects they add to every programme through the work integrated learning wil approach. this application of the theory studied in class helps to better prepare students for the working world and to help find solutions to real life issues after students graduate from the university. the positive reputation of university west is also one factor that influenced my decision to come and study here. the international office was also very welcoming and informative during the information sessions they organized online prior to coming to sweden. they helped with registrations id application and assist international students in finding accommodation.
 i applied to the programme due to the clarity of the course description and the duration of the programme. i already have a background in international business so i thought this would be a perfect match to help me broaden my knowledge in this field.
 is it how you thought it would be?
 yes the programme is exactly what i expected it to be in terms of the courses selfstudy and group works. the university in itself is very much organized spacious and clean. the lecturers are always willing to help in case you need help or more clarification regarding any of the course programmes.
 the most exciting thing i have done here is the opportunity made by university west to meet people from all walks of life. the university has a diverse student population and this always helps to share new ideas and get to experience a little bit of every culture. the student union rotary and the university offers a language café that gives students the opportunity to practice their swedish in smaller groups and meet new people too.
 the university campus is easily accessible and easy to find your way around. it has all the necessary provisions you would need as a student such as a spacious library cafeteria private study rooms and a service center. the library organizes fika moments where everyone is free to attend to have a typical swedish fika experience. people meet to socialize talk and discuss about a wide range of subjects and interests.
 communication between lecturers and student is also very friendly. lecturers even prefer to be called by their first names which is not common in a lot of countries. this explains how cordial and open the university atmosphere is.
 university west has a lot of student fraternities that you can join if you are interested. they organize a lot of events during the orientation days as well as during the whole academic year. as an international student at university west you can also take part in swedish classes which is organized on campus to learn and improve your swedish.
 trollhättan is a small beautiful city with amazing nature ideal for adventurers and thrill seekers. lots of things such as parks and sporting facilities are easily reachable by foot or by bicycles. for a bicycle rider it is easy to get around because there are clear road demarcations for cyclists which make it safe to ride a bicycle. there are lots of cafes and restaurants in the city center. besides that trollhättan has easy access by train to gothenburg which is swedens second biggest city. for travel junkies like me oslo is also just 2 hours and a half away and its also easily reachable by bus.
 when i am not studying i try to have a walk in and around trollhättan or visit different cities and towns in this west coast of sweden. the nature of the country is amazing and mindboggling. i read not long ago that almost 97 of the country is uninhabited and i am always intrigued to see the amount of importance sweden attaches to sustainability and preservation of all this nature it has in abundance.
 i have big future plans and ambitions. i hope to work in an international environment where i can put into practice my working experiences and the knowledge i am gaining from studying here at university west. i am open to new adventures and therefore i am not limiting myself in terms of where exactly i would like to work. depending on the job offers i am going to get after completion of my programme i could either continue to stay and work in sweden move abroad or go back home. nonetheless i am very optimistic that i will be able to contribute positively and have an indelible impact wherever i might find myself in the future.
 due to the immersive learning approach the university has i am very much certain that i will be very much prepared for the real world when i complete my studies here. my studies here have taught me to be an outsideofthebox thinker think of new ways to positively contribute to society work towards finding solutions to complex societal challenges and issues. i know that with the expertise and knowledge i am gaining from studying at university west i will literally have the world at my feet because i will open new opportunities and possibilities.
 principles of cybersecurity parttime campus pfc610
 this course will give the students a broad overview of the subject of cybersecurity and how the subject relates to other parts of the it security area.
 the threats  who where why?
 systems and their weaknesses
 preventive defenses  cryptography aaa network security firewalls
 organisational defenses  policies training
 part of the course is based on the cisco network academy program course cyberops associate
 the course focuses mostly on personal computers and servers. microsoft windows is the main os that is studied in this course
 to be able to print on campus you need a west card and money on your print account. here you will find information about printing and copying pricing and how to print out documents.
 printing copying and scanning
 university west has several multifunction printers that can be used for printing copying and scanning. the hvprint printer is installed on all hvcomputers.
 pick up your printouts by swiping your west card or log in with your username and password at any printer. please note that you must register your west card and choose a pin code on the printer the first time you use the printers. swipe your card and follow the registration wizard on the printers screen.
 the default printing settings are blackwhite and duplex. you can choose whether you want your printout or copy to be punched andor stapled. your printout will wait in the queue for 12 hours after which the printout will be deleted from the queue.
 students pay for printing and copying with a credit card or swish. log in to   and select saldo. the minimum amount is 10 sek.
 if you want to print from your private computer mobile or tablet you can go to  and choose web printing. upload your document for printing and pick it up at one of the printers.
 you can scan to your email home directory or onedrive.  the first time you scan to onedrive you will receive an email to authorize the system to write the scanned file to your onedrive.
 in scan mode youll find ocr after a few scan selections. ocr stands for optical character recognition which means that you can edit the text of what you have scanned. if you dont choose ocr it will be an image.
 need help? via the button you will find among other things
 how to register my westcard for the printer
 how to install the printer hvprint on a private computer
 how to do when my jobs not are being printed
 print scan and copy
 what am i allowed to copy?
 through our copying licence bonus copyright access you may to a certain degree copy from published books journals and magazines and distribute the copies to staff members of the university.
 the basis is that as a teacher you may copy 15 but no more than 15 pages of swedish and international public works. the copying may be made both hand and digitally.
 pricing list for prints and copies
 applies to printing and copying. scanning is free.
 black  white
 singlesided a4 2.00 sekduplex a4 3.80 seksimplex a3 2.50 sekduplex a3 4.80 sek
 printing for guest accounts is not working at the moment
 the fault has been reported and we hope for a quick solution.
 once you have submitted your application to us we will process it and if you are approved for erasmus scholarship for internship abroad we will ask you to complete a traineeship agreement. you will get help and access to this though the application system mobilityonline where you follow a stepbystep process. from here you will receive a template for the agreement which you fill out together with your departmental coordinator and then upload into the same stepbystep process once it has been signed by all parties you your home university and the host organization.
 if you have a nais confirmation and receive targeted pedagogical support today at university west you need to contact the host organization in good time to find out what support you can receive from there.
 should you need your naisconfirmation translated into english or have other questions please contact the coordinator for support to student with disabilities funka@hv.se
 if your application is granted by us you will receive an erasmus scholarship for internship to cover parts of your expenses abroad. you dont need to do anything else but to follow the stepbystep process in order to receive it.
 you also apply for funding for internship abroad though csn. apply for funding for the whole year even if you period is one semester only  it takes longer time to process credits from abroad studiesplacements.
 accommodation arrival registration etc. at the partner university
 all practical issues related to your internship andor stay abroad needs to be handled by the host organization so contact them to find out what you need to do.
 as a student at university west you are insured by kammarkollegiet state insurance student out. when we have received information on the dates of your placement period abroad we will issue an insurance certificate and send to you in good time before your departure.
 privacy law policy and compliance in cybersecurity parttime campus slp600
 this course provides an overview of laws and ethical issues related to cybersecurity. the course also identifies policies rules and procedures that ensure connected devices and networks meet an acceptable level of security based on emerging frameworks for cybersecurity.
 sfc600cyberphysical systems security and
 pfc600principles of cybersecurity or the equivalent.
 problem with hvdesktop at the moment
 hiunfortunately hvdesktop can not be connected. our technicians are working on to fix the issue.
 hello we have an issue that affected several systems including mittkonto isp hvilaadmin hv.se exam archive and hvits. we are working on solving the problem and will get back to you as soon as we have more information
 problem with telephone service
 right now it is not possible to call our switchboard.you can contact us this way
 problem with topdesk  solved
 problem in sending emails from topdesk
 at the moment no emails can be sent from topdesk to users outside the system. wait to answer until the problem is solved.we will publish another message here when everything works again.
 a collaboration project with orust municipality.
 problems with email onedrive and sharepoint.
 problems with ladok
 due to an ongoing cyber attack against umeå university some of ladoks support services have been shut down. there are no indications that the ladok system itself is affected by the attack.
 these parts of ladok are likely to be affected by the incident and may have limited functionality
 the lis adapter integrations with canvas and inspera
 ladok for staff and ladok for students transfer of admissions and rejections from nya
 ladok for staff establishment of students and change of personal identification number students
 malfunction with access in visma proceedosolved
 we are currently having a malfunction in visma  proceedo and are working on solving it.
 problems with telephony
 there are currently disturbances in the mobile network. this also affects the universitys calls to mobile phones. sometimes we hear the caller but they dont hear us sometimes the other way around.
 proceeding papers
 full proceeding papers have been sent out via email to all registered delegates.
 process development in gasshielded arc welding
 gasmetal arc welding processes have developed significantly during the last 10  20 years among other things through the possibilities for advances control of the process parameters current voltage etc that has become feasible by use of modern micro processors and switched power sources. a number of variants of the conventional migmag and tig processes have been developed for example for welding of thin sheets also called cold methods. for welding of heavier plates there are today methods like tandem and twinarc. further different hybrid methods have been developed in particular lasermag hybrid welding.
 the methods have been examined in a high number of investigations during the past years both from a more fundamental angle e.g modeling as well as in different applications studies. there is still however much to do to understand the processes better especially the influence of process parameters and their relationship to each other in order to if possible develop them further. also the robustness tolerance to parameter variation and economy profitability are becoming more in focus.
 the aim of the present projects is therefor to study a couple of the different methods from different angles and with different tools to increase the knowledge about how the methods can be used in an optimal way and to create independent knowledge. the projects will be directed towards process understanding application studies and modeling. further the welding of different steels will be examined more closely like high strength steels and stainless steels.
 another aim with the projects is with the help of a systematic investigation create understanding of similarities and differences  between the different methods and process variants and in that way create new independent knowledge of interest to university west and the participating companies. the industry shall get a good understand for the advantages disadvantages and possibilities with different welding methods.
 process simulation and modeling parttime campus pom600
 the course deals with heat transfer with a focus on modeling of manufacturing processes and an introduction to simulation. the student will acquire a good understanding of the physics underlying the treated phenomena and will receive training in problem formulation modeling and problem solving analytical andor numerical.
 mts600metallurgy of welding and additive manufacturing or the equivalent.
 procmc  advanced coating for the next generation of jet engines
 the project seeks to further build on the exciting outcome of a recently concluded prestudy project carried out within the lighter vinnova program. with high interest of key earlier partners in continued development of cuttingedge environmental barrier coatings ebcs to protect ceramic matrix composites cmcs and addition of worldleading companies as partners attracted by the competence demonstrated the consortium now covers the entire value chain.
 this includes a spray equipment manufacturer northwest mettech canada a feedstock manufacturer saintgobain france an academic institute with expertise in coatings for high temperature applications univ. west sweden a commercial coating solution provider tse sweden and three major aerospace industries as end users pratt  whitney usa safran france and gkn aerospace sweden.
 in present times when most aerospace companies are downsizing activities and budgets for rd activities such huge global interest in the project is motivated by the fact that cmcs will replace metallic superalloy components in aerospace  space applications in the near future.
 prodex new educational model meets industrys need for professional development
 as a result of rapid technological developments industry needs to address the need for new skill sets quickly. in the prodex project university west and 51 companies and organisations have developed a new educational concept that facilitates lifelong learning and can make swedish industry more competitive and sustainable.
 prodex stands for expert in production technology and involves masterslevel short courses in production technology. the courses are tailored for industry professionals and make it possible to study and work at the same time. the project has also developed a new method for validation of competence and skills among industry professionals.
 during the project period 20142020 31 courses were jointly offered by the university and business community with a focus on relevant skills development needs in the manufacturing industry. now the courses are part of the universitys regular course offering. they are free of charge and are offered both remotely and on campus.
 in parallel with the prodex project the university has carried out several education initiatives to meet skill requirements from industry. we collaborated with other universities in the kit and mampe projects. we also incorporated the expressed need of companies to include sustainability aspects in our prodex courses within the framework of the prodeko project. together with industry we also developed our masters programme through the moulin project.
 educational models for professionals will be further developed and new courses will be planned in our latest projects exsus and prodkomp.
 in the articles and videos below course participants and other participants reflect on prodex. additional reading about currently available courses.
 michael erneland business developer  innovation sporveien oslo
 ted hendberg supply chain manager siemens energy
 during an employee evaluation my supervisor cecilia axelsson asked me what my next step would be says robert. i had been working at scania for 25 years eight of which were as a team manager and i could picture doing something new. i graduated from high school a long time ago and i didnt know what university studies would involve. but now together with cecilia i had the chance to write a twoyear plan based on the particular skills i wanted to develop.
 robert decided to combine three prodex courses with two programmes at other universities. the result was a mixture of management courses logistics machine learning logistics flows and more. the solution was to study on a halftime basis while still working his regular job.
 alternating work and studies worked well. i was able to put my knowledge to use at work immediately. it was also a stimulating break from work and i ended up with a network of people in other industries with whom to exchange experiences.
 courses designed for professionals are valuable
 cecilia axelsson is also satisfied with roberts skills development journey. he now has a new job as team manager for line technology in the chassis assembly and press plant.
 it was a fruitful approach for robert. hes grown into his new role well. its valuable for us that universities offer courses designed for professionals. our staff is already very knowledgeable of course but may need to fill in gaps with specific information to take on new roles says cecilia engineering manager at the company.
 scanias production plant in oskarshamn has been manufacturing trucks since 1946. around 2800 employees work here with the entire chain from sheetmetal pressing to complete customised cabs. many of the employees began immediately after high school or university studies and have learned the profession at the company.
 a major shift in technology is beginning
 roger karlsson and his colleagues at the hr department are currently preparing what may be one of the companys biggest skills development initiatives ever.
 were at the very beginning of a major shift in technology and were mapping out what new roles and skills will be needed moving forward. within ten years our manufacturing will be characterised by digitized production systems. for example collaborative robots will handle heavy monotonous tasks that are currently done manually says roger who works with training and development. skills development of our current staff is clearly a key factor. i see roberts and cecilias approach here as a textbook example of how it should work.
 opening new doors for our employees
 we work with several universities on continuing professional development. university wests prodex courses are a popular and highquality form of training because professionals can validate their skills. in this way the courses are available whether or not our employees have studied at a university. when it comes to our technology shift this is invaluable says roger.
 its also a huge advantage that these courses are offered both remotely and on campus. especially for us in oskarshamn which is pretty far from any higher education institutions. its opening new doors for our employees.
 production technology parttime campus ptkf010
 production technology 7.5 hp
 upon completion of the course the doctoral student should be able to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of
 various production processes used in industrial manufacturing
 various systems used for the control of production processes used in industrial manufacturing
 the way in which economic factors logistics and quality affect production processes
 the doctoral student should demonstrate competence and skills in
 making use of at least two quality tools in a relevant project
 the student should fulfil the requirements for acceptance to thirdcycle studies in production technology or the equivalent.
 general syllabus for the thirdcycle programme in production technology.pdf
 smart  durable materials and manufacturing methods
 smart products and processes
 smart production technology for flexible  agilechangeable production systems
 smart working methods for fast  efficient product realization  industrialization
 effective quality  maintenance  productivity development towards smart production
 testupon completion of the course the doctoral student should be able to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of
 thermal spray day  22 maj
 to create a constructive setting for both companies and the academy
 professional development in electrical engineering
 to successfully navigate the industrys significant green technical transition and the electrification of society working engineers in various sectors need to acquire new skills. our short courses in electrical engineering are developed in collaboration with the industry to meet their substantial competency needs. if you lack university eligibility we validate your work experience.
 vehicle manufacturers electric energy producers electricity distributors technical companies and many other stakeholders have a significant need for new expertise in electrical engineering. the demand is increasing rapidly as the vehicle fleet becomes electrified. at the same time major challenges are expected for the energy system as electricity demand rises sharply nondispatchable electricity sources expand and electricity needs to be distributed over increasingly longer distances.
 university west and uppsala university are together addressing the industrys competence needs with advancedlevel courses tailored for working engineers. the courses have been developed in close collaboration with twelve companies from various industries atlas copco gkn aerospace hitachi intel polestar svenska kraftnät tengineering vattenfall alstom swedish electromobility centre sandvik and standup for energy.
 courses in spring 2024
 electrical machines free from rare earth metals 5 ects
 electrical design of propulsion batteries 2.5 ects
 power electronics and electric drive systems 5 ects
 safety in working on and in electric vehicles 2.5 ects
 electrical solutions for support systems in vehicles 2.5 ects
 sustainability  design and production of electric vehicles 7.5 ects
 control systems for electric vehicles 5 ects
 analysis and design with respect to electromagnetic compatibility aek600 2.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes two inperson meetings in trollhättan.
 electric vehicles elf600 7.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction takes place on campus in trollhättan.
 electric vehicles  batteries for electric vehicles bel601 2.5 ectsparttime distance learning with scheduled online meetings.
 electric vehicles  manufacturing and recycling of lithiumion batteries tvl601 2.5 ectsparttime distance learning with scheduled online meetings.renewable electricity production and energy storage fee600 2.5 ectsparttime distance learning with scheduled online meetings.
 power quality elk600 2.5 ectsparttime distance learning with scheduled online meetings.
 courses in spring 2025
 regulations and standards for power systems ref600 5 ectsthe course is delivered in a hybrid format. you can attend the classes in person in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes one inperson session in trollhättan. the course is taught in english.
 economy and electricity market eco600 5 ectsparttime distance learning with scheduled online sessions. the course is taught in english.
 power quality elk600 2.5 ectsparttime distance learning with scheduled online sessions. the course is taught in english.
 renewable power generation and energy storage fee600 2.5 ectsparttime distance learning with scheduled online sessions. the course is taught in english.
 electrical machines free from rare earth metals ems600 5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes one inperson meeting in trollhättan.
 power electronics and electric drive systems 5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes one inperson meeting in trollhättan.
 electrical design of propulsion batteries 2.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes one inperson meeting in trollhättan.
 safety in working on and in electric vehicles 2.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes two inperson meetings in trollhättan.
 introduction to power system simulation 2.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is provided online.
 sustainability  design and production of electric vehicles hdp601 7.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes two mandatory inperson meetings in trollhättan.
 electrical solutions for support systems in vehicles 2.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes one inperson meeting in trollhättan.
 control systems for electric vehicles 5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes one inperson meeting in trollhättan.
 electric power systems 7.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes one inperson meeting in trollhättan.
 electricity production and energy storage 7.5 ectsthe course is offered in english. instruction is hybrid allowing participation either in the classroom or via zoom. the course includes two inperson meetings in trollhättan.
 combine work and studies
 the courses are designed for you to study alongside your job. for example many courses can be taken on campus or online.
 the courses are free of charge and shorter compared to our regular coursesmost run over a 5week period. you can choose which courses you want to build on and apply in the same way as for other university programs.
 do you lack university eligibility?
 even if you dont have formal qualifications such as grades or diplomas you may have the knowledge that meets the eligibility requirements for the course. we apply a validation of work experience which means we can assess your competence based on both formal credentials and work experience.
 to enable us to validate attach your resume under the qualifications tab on antagning.se or in our local application form when you apply. the resume should include
 signature of your immediate supervisoruse our template
 you can download the template below. instructions are on the second page of the document
 validationofworkexperienceforeligibilitytemplate.docx
 please remember to keep the documents name when you save and upload your completed resume on antagning.se. this ensures proper handling of the document.
 the courses are developed in collaboration with industry
 to meet the competence needs of the business sector we develop the courses in close collaboration with industrial companies and relevant networks. we maintain an ongoing dialogue about which knowledge and skills are relevant for the industry today and in the future.
 the courses are developed as part of the educational project electrification for a sustainable energy system funded by the knowledge foundation. learn more
 all courses offer university credits upon successful completion of assessments regardless of whether you have prior university eligibility or not.
 voices about the courses
 i already use much of what i have learned and on several different levels.
 learn to develop a more optimal product in automotive engineering or electrical engineering.
 prabhu ramanathan assistant professor university west
 todays shortage of expertise in electrical engineering is slowing development.
 boel ekergård associate professor university west
 professors associate professors and doctors were honored on the longawaited celebration
 professors associate professors and doctors honored on celebration
 last friday it was finally time to celebrate university wests 50 new professors associate professors and doctors in festive forms. this years academic ceremony was framed by inspiring speeches awards and atmospheric music.
 about a hundred festively dressed guests were present and close to 400 people attended this years academic ceremony online as 11 professors 16 associate professors and 21 doctors received laurel wreaths diplomas and other awards. in addition attention was drawn to the universitys newly appointed honorary doctor and this years recipient of the student union at university wests pedagogical award.
 for associate professor mohit gupta it was extra valuable that the ceremony was broadcast live this year.
 my family lives in india and really appreciate that they can follow the whole holiday commented mohit.
 academic ceremony is about celebrating new knowledge and progress and at university west it is normally done every two years. after the most recent celebration in 2018 the ceremony has been postponed due to the pandemic. therefore this years holiday was extra longawaited.
 as tradition dictates a number of inspiring speeches were given this year by among others dr. tahira raza. she told about her journey from being an unemployed single mother of 4 children without higher education to becoming a doctor of production technology.
 it is never too late to get an education. i was 36 years old when i decided to study engineering at university west tahira said.
 here you can get a glimpse of the celebration and comments from some of the guests
 at the academic celebration 2021 the following people were noticed
 honorary doctor
 maureen drysdale professor of psychology university of waterloo and st. jeromes university canada.
 adnan agic production engineeringashwin devotta production engineeringkarl fahlström production engineeringvahid hosseini production engineeringana magalhães production engineeringmorgan nilsen production engineeringlivia norström informatics specialization workintegrated learningtahira raza production engineeringarbab rehan production engineeringedvard svenman production engineeringnageswaran tamil alagan production engineering
 doctors who have defended their dissertations at another university
 monica egelström pedagogical work umeå universityjohan gross linguistics university of gothenburgfabian hanning materials science chalmers university of technologyanette johnsson health and caring sciences jönköping universitysabina kapetanovic welfare and social sciences jönköping universitystefan nilsson informatics university of gothenburgmaria rönnerhag caring sciences university of southeast norwayellinor tengelin health and caring sciences jönköping universitykurt wicke pedagogy university of gothenburglinnéa åberg work science university of gothenburg
 midhat ajanovic film studiesmikael baaz political sciencemalin berghammer caring scienceåse boman care science specialization workintegrated learningmirella forsberg ahlcrona educational science with a didactic focusmohit gupta production technology specializing in thermal sprayingtuba inal political scienceveronika karlsson nursing specialization workintegrated learningåsa rejnö nursingsignild risenfors pedagogyfredrik sikström production technology specialization process controllena sjöberg pedagogymaria spante informaticsylva svensson psychologyanita varga literary studies with a didactic focusthomas winman pedagogy specialization workintegrated learning
 anette bolin social workjan gustafsson nyckel educational scienceali kazemi psychology specializing in work and organizational psychologyulrika lundh snis informatics specialization workintegrated learningmartin molin social work focusing on the disability arealena pareto informatics specialization workintegrated learningsandra pennbrant care science specialization workintegrated learninglaurence piper political science specialization workintegrated learningåsa roxberg care scienceamerico scotti welding technology specialization arc weldinglars walter workintegrated learning specialization in industry digitalisation
 traditionally the student union at university west awarded the pedagogical prize to one of the universitys teachers. this years winner is andreas de blanche senior lecturer in computer science.
 building universities without walls to meet global challenges
 the session will include introductory remarks by michael murphy and pam fredman followed by a panel discussion.  participants michael murphy president european university association eua  pam fredman former president international association of universities iau  eugenia kazamaki head of division small business and innovation advisory european investment bank eib lars stenqvist chief technical officer volvo group linn svärd president swedish national union of students sfs
 11.15  12.15 building universities without walls to meet global challenges
 the session will include introductory remarks by michael murphy and pam fredman followed by a panel discussion.  medverkande michael murphy president european universities association eua  pam fredman f.d. ordförande för international association of universities iau  eugenia kazamaki head of division small business and innovation advisory europeiska investeringsbanken eib lars stenqvist chief technical officer volvo technology ab linn svärd ordförande sveriges förenade studentkårer
 program iailwebbinarier ht2020
 iail_webinarium_ht2020 final .pdf
 the  conference program is available below.
 the conference will take place in zoom. there will be a main room where we start and end the conference in between we will enjoy the keynotes sessions and entertainment. session matrix and absract book below. most welcome
 session matrix and the abstract book  at the bottom
 december 910 th
 december 9th
 1430  15.45      keynote dr norah mcrae university of waterloo
 1900                    entertainment music and quiz with johan bengtsson
 december 10 th
 8.30  8.45         welcome to day 2
 8.45  10.00       key note dr henri jacobs  university west                                   10.00  10.30     break
 1145  1200      closing remarks
 abstact book
 10.00  11.00 registration and coffee
 11.30  12.30 keynote 1  thomas johansson youth studies in transition  theoretical considerations
 15.30  16.00 coffee
 16.00  17.00 keynote 2  chris haywood tinderizing young men branding masculinity and mobile dating
 17.00  18.00 meeting with the nordic network for youth studies
 18.00  reception
 09.00  10.00 keynote 3  louise archer can the subaltern do science?
 minoritized young peoples struggles for intelligibility in the secondary classroom
 10.00  10.30 coffee
 16.00  17.00 keynote 4  lotta löfgrenmårtensson love and sexuality among young people with intellectual disability
 17.00  18.00 young presentation of journal
 11.00  11.30 coffee
 11.30  12.30 keynote 5  kirsten drotner digital natives? myths and realities of a muchtooted concept
 12.30  13.00 next nyris and closing remarks
 below you can find the list of programmes and courses which are offered by the department of engineering science at university west
 university preparatory studies one year in swedish
 preparatory college year engineering 60 pe credits also offered on distance
 bachelor programmes all in swedish with selected courses in english unless stated otherwise
 higher education technician electric power technology 120 he credits
 electrical engineering electric power technology 180 he credits
 electrical engineering vehicle 180 he credits
 network technology and itsecurity 120 he credits
 computer engineering  programming and network technology 180 he credits
 industrial engineering and management 180 he credits
 mechanical engineering 180 he credits also offered on distance
 mechanical engineering 180 he credits in english
 surveying engineering 180 he credits
 master programmes all in english
 electric vehicle engineering 60 he credits
 manufacturing engineering 60 he credits
 manufacturing engineering 120 he credits
 robotics and automation 60 he credits also offered on distance
 robotics and automation 120 he credits also offered on distance
 phd programme in english
 production engineering 240 he credits
 we also offer freestanding courses in swedish within the following subject areas
 network technology
 mathematics
 mer information om internationalisering
 the course provides the students with the programming skills required for further studies in automation. the focus is on the following areas
 basic programming concepts
 structured programming in python
 objectoriented programming
 microsoft azure dev tools for teaching. microsoft operativsystem och programvaror ej office.
 microsoft office.
 the project digital examination will begin at högskolan väst in the fall of 2022.
 the project will last until june 2024. the project primarily aims to promote educational development and the result should contribute to creating quality legal certainty and appropriate support for all digital examinations.
 insperapilot  what does dragana think?
 new system web page for inspera
 the digital examination project is carried out in three parallel subprojects all of which work closely together pedagogical development oncampus eexamination and administrative support and process.
 contact personsdo not hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or concerns
 more about on campus eexamination
 more about support and process
 project planningimplementation of the system insperaplanning for building renovation and equipmentspring 2023
 testing of insperadevelopment of pedagogical training material for teachersproduction of information for studentsdevelopment of training packages for invigilatorsreview all digital examinations in relation to pedagogy and supportreconstruction of a hall with approx. 50 seats adapted for oncampus eexaminationpilots in sharp hall exam max 50 studentsautumn 2023
 training of teachersreconstruction of a hall with approx. 100 seats adapted for oncampus eexaminationpilots in sharp oncampus eexamination with large student groups max 150 studentspreparations for widespread introductionspringsummer 2024
 the project is finished and a final report will be delivered.
 project ownersleaders
 projects within  primus
 results and reflections on completed projects
 prodex new educational model meets industrys  need for professional development
 projects child and youth studies
 many projects are getting financial support through external funding. here are some exampels
 eunational institute of health nih
 foundations
 childrens welfare foundation swedenmajblomman mayflower
 authorities on a national level
 national agency for educationthe public health agency of sweden
 authorities on a regional level
 subtle visual guidance in ar for assembly tasks
 ahil artificial and human intelligence through learning
 sesma  sharing economy and smart mobility acceptance
 sirr sustainability innovation and resilience in rural areas
 main activities in the project have been
 new rd networks
 goal after 22 years 4statusafter 2 years 6
 common  scientific publications chalmers hv
 goal after 22 years 20statusafter 2 years 12
 goal after 22 years 7statusafter 2 years 3
 goal after 22 years 3statusafter 2 years 1
 goal after 22 years 8statusafter 2 years 10
 goal after 22 years 14statusafter 2 years 2
 goal after 22 years 30statusafter 2 years 15
 in december 2014 and jan 2016 result seminars were given and the intention is to continue the project in a second phase during 20162017.
 materials technology
 geometry tolerance design in welded structures
 geometry and motion planning
 nonorganic chemistry
 university west expert area
 suspension plasma spray  sps process for thermal barrier coatings
 machining process with high pressure cooling
 welding processes
 control and monitoring of welding processes
 automation  optimization in production processes
 thermal spray metal based processes
 design and control of properties in sps surface treatment
 design and control of surface properties and tool wear in machining of nibased alloys
 quality assurance in welded structures
 robot based additive manufacturing based on welding methods
 energy optimization in production processes
 design and control of properties in thermal spray  based high temperature corrosion surface treatment
 machining gkn sandvik seco tools brogrens automation volvo cars kuka robots binarthermal spray cermic and metal coatings treibacher innovnano mettech gkn sew  uk siemens swe and uk nasa boeing turbocoating it etc.welding structures gkn brogrens permanovaadditive manufacturing gkn va automotive swepart tools lihds verktyg
 the prowil project develops sustainable smart automation integrating human centric perspectives towards i5.0 reducing changeover times and achieving production goals.
 it addresses humantechnology challenges in industrial digitalization emphasizing strengths like creativity and critical thinking. by leveraging inhouse knowledge prowil enables efficient handling of new products and goals. limited understanding exists on opportunities offered by industrial robots and integrating smart automation. the project aims for resilient inclusive humancentric smart automation synergizing technology development and industrial management. partners include university west anva ksg gkn aerospace inwoco mim safe saab group ultramare and volvo bussar.
 article about the project
 ai phd students from rochester institute of technology will participate in prowil
 to be published soonlevant a. murakami k.  mcsweeney m. 2023. acivity theory an introduction. ibidem.
 the latest publications
 adamides e. d. 2022. activity theory for understanding and managing system innovations. international journal of innovation studies.
 adamides e. d. karacapilidis n. i.  konstantinopoulos k. 2021. argumentation schemes in technologymediated open innovation productservice models an activity systems perspective. systems 94 91.
 adelé s. cippelletti e. dionisio c. lémonie y.  chaumon m.e. b. 2024. prospecting cooperative intelligent transport systems acceptance by road management teams through activity theory  a qualitative study. behaviour  information technology. advance online publication.
 aditi kataria gholam reza emad  jiangang fei 2024. future shipping operations and transitioning maritime higher education an activity system perspective. in proceedings of the international conference on maritime autonomy and remote navigation 2023 pp. 2027. easychair.
 afacan k. bal a. artiles a. j. cakir h. i. ko d. mawene d.  kim h. 2021. inclusive knowledge production at an elementary school through familyschooluniversity partnerships a formative intervention study. learning culture and social interaction 31 100569.
 airaj m. ethical artificial intelligence for teachinglearning in higher education. educ inf technol 2024.
 alfrey laura 2023 an expansive learning approach to transformingtraditional fitness testing in health and physical education student voice feelings and hopescurriculum studies in health and physical education doi 10.108025742981.2023.2183477
 alonzo d. leverett j.  obsioma e. 2021. leading an assessment reform ensuring a wholeschool approach for decisionmaking. front. educ. 6 631857. doi 10.3389feduc.
 ambrose d.  shahid a. 2023. teachers perception of homework effectiveness in primary grades. journal of education and educational development.
 artiles j. a. may 4 2023. probing inclusive education in the global south a critical cultural historical standpoint. stanford graduate of education public scholarship collaborative. available
 arinaitwe d. mifsud l. kato h.  sannerud a. r. 2022. learning through collaboration between vocational teacher training institutions and workplaces barriers and contradictions. nordic journal of vocational education and training 121 2550.
 asmolov g. 2015. crowdsourcing and the folksonomy of emergency response the construction of a mediated subject. interactions studies in communication  culture 62 155178.
 asmolov g. 2022. internet regulation and crisisrelated resilience from covid19 to existential risks. the communication review 123.
 augustsson d. 2021. expansive learning in a change laboratory intervention for teachers. journal of educational change 224 475499.
 baek j. byun t. yu e. lee d. lee j.  shim h. 2023. exploring scientists and students perceptions about competencies in doing science and sciencerelated experience. asiapacific science education 92 299331.
 barker c. 2022. using activity theory to redesign a video supported oral presentation competence development activity in higher education. learning 31 119.
 baloutsos s. karagiannaki a.  pramatari k. 2020. identifying contradictions in an incumbentstartup ecosysteman activity theory approach. european journal of innovation management.
 barma s. deslandes r. cooper e. a.  voyer s. 2021. school community involvement to address student decisionmaking regarding personal health. school community journal 312.
 bawa danjuma. 2023. activity theory approach and geographic information systems affordance for effective land management and administration actualization. scientific african. e01970. 10.1016j.sciaf.2023.e01970.
 bligh b. 2023. designing a change laboratory outline plan. bureau de change laboratory.
 boudra l. lémonie y. grosstephan v.  nascimento a. 2023. the culturalhistorical development of occupational accidents and diseases prevention in france a scoping review. safety science 159 106016.
 braswell g. s. 2021. changes in ancient egyptian mathematical artifacts from a culturalhistorical activity theory perspective. culture  psychology 1354067x211032872.
 bøje r. b. musaues p. sørensen d.  ludvigsen m. s. 2021. systemic contradictions as causes to challenges in nurses transitional care a change laboratory intervention. nurse education today 103 104950.
 campbell a. d. terrence f. 2021 sensing igoli applying typological activity system models in the design of innovative and appropriate urban technologies
 cakir h. i. bal a. engeström y.  sannino a. 2022. contradictions as an entry into inclusive systemic design addressing racial disparities in the discipline at an urban middle school. learning culture and social interaction 35 100641.
 calvo m.  sclater m. 2021. creating spaces for collaboration in community codesign. international journal of art  design education 40 1 232250.
 cenci a. lemos m. f. bôas d. f. v. damiani m. f.  engeström y. 2020. the contradictions within inclusion in brazil. learning culture and social interaction 24 100375.
 chang s. developing preservice bilingual teachers transformative agency teaching and teacher educationvolume 137 2024 104405 issn 0742051x
 chang s. 2021. supporting expansive learning in preservice bilingual teachers zone of proximal development of the activity system an analysis of a fourfield model trajectory. professional development in education 47 23 225242.
 chang s. martínezroldán c. m.  torresguzmán m. e. 2021. the manifestation of chinese preservice bilingual teachers relational agency in a change laboratory intervention. mind culture and activity 281 4460.
 chang s. martínezroldán c.  torresguzmán m. e. 2020. struggling tobe or nottobe a bilingual teacher identity formation in a change laboratory intervention. methodological innovations 132 2059799120921696.
 charitonos k.  littlejohn a. 2021. professional learning in healthcare settings in resourcelimited environments what are the tensions for professionals knowing and learning about antimicrobial resistance? studies in continuing education 118.
 chen z. chen w. jia j.  le h. 2022. exploring awesupported writing process an activity theory perspective. language learning  technology 262.
 chikunda c. chikunda p.  de castro r. f. 2017. boundary learning in a gender responsive curriculum transformation in zimbabwe an activity theory approach. roteiro 423 497522.
 choudry s. 2023. power relations within division of labor  the key to empowering learners from marginalized backgrounds in mathematics classrooms. mind culture and activity 117.
 chu w. glad w.  wever r. 2021. a metasynthesis of the use of activity theory in design for sustainable behaviour. design science 7.
 ciftci o. berezina k. 2023. exploring customer experience with service robots in hospitality and tourism activity theory perspective. in ferrerrosell b. massimo d. berezina k. eds information and communication technologies in tourism 2023. enter 2023. springer proceedings in business and economics. springer cham.
 clifford s. 2022. changing shared work practice developing faculty and administration voices in institutional educational technology policy in south korea doctoral dissertation lancaster university.
 clifford s. 2022. the use and value of cultural historical activity theory in institutional educational technology policy. studies in technology enhanced learning.
 crampton a. e. scharber c. lewis c. j.  majors y. j. 2018. meaningful and expansive literacy learning through technologymediated productions. journal of adolescent  adult literacy 615 573576.
 curry r. 2022. insights from a culturalhistorical he library makerspace case study on the potential for academic libraries to lead on supporting ethicalmaking underpinned by critical material literacy. journal of librarianship and information science 09610006221104796.
 dai z. xiong j. zhao l.  he x. 2022. the effectiveness of ictenhanced teaching mode using activity theory on raising class interaction and satisfaction in an engineering course. interactive learning environments 120.
 danish j. a. enyedy n. saleh a.  humburg m. 2020. learning in embodied activity framework a sociocultural framework for embodied cognition. international journal of computersupported collaborative learning 15  1 4987.
 davis b. tu x. georgen c. danish j. a.  enyedy n. 2019. the impact of different play activity designs on students embodied learning. information and learning sciences.
 degerman h wallo a. conceptualising learning from resilient performance a scoping literature review. appl ergon. 2023 nov 8115104165. doi 10.1016j.apergo.2023.104165. epub ahead of print. pmid 37948841.
 dejulio s. 2024. tensions within and between systems in the first years of teaching. international journal of inclusive education 121.
 deslandes r. barma s.  beaumier f. 2020. collaborative schoolfamily relationships using the expansive learning cycle to enhance parents empowering in helping their child in the context of a new reading method. international journal about parents in education 121 4761.
 devisch o. palmieri t.  devoldere s. 2022 august. designing via detours why patterns may save the suburb. in proceedings of the participatory design conference 2022volume 2 pp. 118123.
 dinh h.  sannino a. 2024. toward a diagnostic toolkit for intervention in teachers agency during curriculum reform groundwork for a change laboratory in vietnam. teaching and teacher education 140 104494. doi10.1016j.tate.2024.104494
 dornan t. lee c. findlaywhite f. gillespie h.  conn r. 2021. acting wisely in complex clinical situations mutual safety for clinicians as well as patients. medical teacher 111.
 douglas a. s. 2012. creating expansive learning opportunities in schools the role of school leaders in initial teacher education partnerships. european journal of teacher education 351 315.
 du toit adri  petersen neal  mentz elsa  balfour robert  kruger cornè  mdakane marry  beer josef  bunt byron  white lounell  lubbe anitia  pool jessica  heymans yolande  koch rhea  mokwatsi gontse. 2023. innovative curriculum design bridging the theorypractice divide in workintegrated learning to foster selfdirected learning.
 due k. skoog m. areljung s. ottander c.  sundberg b. 2022. teachers conceptualisations of science teachingobstacles and opportunities for pedagogical continuity across early childhood school forms. international journal of early years education 116.
 edwards andrew james 2024. the use of information systems artefacts and expertise in a study of prediction in the strategic management of house fires. macquarie university. thesis.
 ekström s.  pareto l. 2022. the dual role of humanoid robots in education as didactic tools and social actors. education and information technologies 136.
 engeström y. engeström r.  suntio a. 2002. can a school community learn to master its own future? an activitytheoretical study of expansive learning among middle school teachers. in g. wells  g. claxton eds. learning for life in the 21st century sociocultural perspectives on the future of education p. 211224. london blackwell.
 engeström y. rantavuori p. ruutu p.  tapolahaapala m. 2023. finding life beyond the classroom walls a change laboratory supporting expansive deencapsulation of school. education  didactique 172 125141.
 engeström y. rantavuori p. ruutu p.  tapolahaapala m. 2022. the hybridisation of adolescents worlds as a source of developmental tensions a study of discursive manifestations of contradictions. educational review 122.
 engeström y. rantavuori p. ruutu p.  tapolahaapala m. 2023. from future orientation to futuremaking towards adolescents transformative agency. in n. hopwood  a. sannino eds. agency and transformation motives mediation and motion. cambridge cambridge university press.
 fletcher l. 2021. lets chat about chat illuminating undergraduates literature discussion with cultural historical activity theory. learning culture and social interaction 29 100498.
 garcia aguado a.  alvarez canovas i. 2024. hacker education and transformative agency an empirical study in hacker communities and in the school case of conexão escolamundo. mind culture and activity 118.
 garraway j. cupido x. dippenaar h. mntuyedwa v. ndlovu n. pinto a.  purcell van graan j. 2021. the change laboratory as an approach to harnessing conversation for academic development. international journal for academic development 116.
 geertshuis s. liu q. lewis n.  cui j. 2022. stuck between a rock and a hard place the challenge of preparing graduates for their futures. innovations in education and teaching international 115.
 gorman g. using a change laboratory to voice students lived experience of moving from facetoface to online instruction. history.
 guo k. li y. li y. et al. understanding efl students chatbotassisted argumentative writing an activity theory perspective. educ inf technol 2023.
 gustavsson m  halvarsson lundkvist a 2023 stakeholders learning and transformative action when developing a collaboration platform to provide welfare services studies in continuing education doi 10.10800158037x.2023.2219052
 hammond s. f. 2022. culturalhistorical investigations into the dialectics of skills development implementation and occupational identity in the informal construction small and micro enterprise workplace. . faculty of engineering and the built environment department of construction economics and management. retrieved from
 hartwell a. d. 2023. emergency remote teaching and digital technology usage in k12 teacher practice doctoral thesis university of calgary calgary canada. retrieved from
 he s qi c. analysis and dissolution of potential contradictions in thematic lessons from a culturalhistorical activity theory perspective. sustainability. 2023 152416931.
 henderson l. nuttall j. wood e.  martin j. 2022. the potential of leading identityas an analytic concept for understanding educational leadership development in early childhood education. teachers and teaching 115.
 hernandezmartinez p.  keane t. 2024. learning mathematics and its relevance through a digital storytelling assessment task at university. international journal of mathematical education in science and technology 117.
 hite r. l. childers g. m.  hoffman j. 2024. culturalhistorical activity theory as an integrative model of socioscientific issue based learning in museums using extended reality technologies. international journal of science education part b 116.
 ho j. hung d. chua p. h.  binte munir n. 2022. integrating distributed with ecological leadership through the lens of activity theory. educational management administration  leadership 17411432221077156.
 ho s. m.  gross m. 2021. consciousness of cyber defense a collective activity system for developing organizational cyber awareness. computers  security 108 102357.
 hopwood n. dhungana p. prasad pant b. shrestha d  shahi r. 2023 professional learning promoting agency in challenging practice contexts studies in continuing education doi 10.10800158037x.2023.2219051
 hopwood n. pointon k. dadich a. moraby k.  elliot c. 2022. forward anchoring in transformative agency how parents of children with complex feeding difficulties transcend the status quo. learning culture and social interaction 33 100616.
 hu c. y. nisbet g.  chang y. c. 2022. responding to change in a medical student rural community service insights from activity theory. medical education.
 hurtado s. l. b. gardona n. de almeida i. m.  querol m. a. p. 2024. change laboratory intervention for promoting learning about causes and prevention of workplace aggressions in a mental health facility. nurse education in practice 75 103878.
 hyrkkö s.  kajamaa a. 2021. distributed creativity and expansive learning in a teacher training schools change laboratory. in s. lemmetty k. collin v. p. glăveanu  p. forsman eds creativity and learning context processes and support pp. 145174. cham palgrave macmillan.
 ikwunne t. hederman l.  wall p. j. 2022. cocreating digital health service activity theory and communicative ecology framework analysis.
 jensen r. 2021. exploring causal relationships qualitatively an empirical illustration of how causal relationships become visible across episodes and contexts. journal of educational change 118.
 kaatrakoski h. littlejohn a.  charitonos k. 2021. antimicrobial resistance challenging professional learning in three lmics. journal of workplace learning.
 kaup c. f.  brooks e. 2022. a culturalhistorical perspective on how double stimulation triggers expansive learning how teachers and social educators can use double stimulation to implement computational thinking in mathematics. designs for learning.
 ko d. bal a. bird bear a. sannino a.  engeström y. 2021. transformative agency for justice addressing racial disparity of school discipline with the indigenous learning lab. race ethnicity and education 124.
 kornelaki a. c.  plakitsi k. 2018. identifying contradictions in science education activity using the change laboratory methodology. world journal of education 82 2745.
 korte r.  brozina c.  johri a.  jesiek b. k. 2023 june mediation and maintenance in engineering professional work practices findings from a utility company paper presented at 2023 asee annual conference  exposition baltimore  maryland.
 kurjenoja a. k. schumacher m.  carrerakurjenoja j. 2021. landscape sensitizing through expansive learning in architectural education. land 10 2 151.
 lam s. t. e. 2021. a webbased feedback platform for peer and teacher feedback on writing an activity theory perspective. computers and composition 62 102666.
 lee y. ko d.  lim s. 2024. marginalization at the intersection of language culture and disability systemic contradictions perceived by special education teachers in serving culturally and linguistically diverse students with disabilities in south korea. peabody journal of education 991 4264.
 lee k. fanguy m. bligh b.  lu x. s. 2021. adoption of online teaching during the covid19 pandemic a systematic analysis of changes in university teaching activity. educational review 743 460483.
 lémonie y. grosstephan v.  tomás j. l. 2021. from a sociological given context to changing practice transforming problematic power relations in educational organizations to overcome social inequalities. frontiers in psychology 11.  doi
 lipponen l. rajala a. hilppö j.  pursi a. 2024. change laboratory as a tool to address moralethical tensions in the work of early childhood education professionals. teaching and teacher education 142 104547. doi10.1016j.tate.2024.104547
 lund v. 2021. supporting transformative agency among urban actors in the change laboratory intervention.
 lundström c.  lindblom j. 2021. care in dairy farming with automatic milking systems identified using an activity theory lens. journal of rural studies 87 386403.
 maimaiti g. jia c.  hew k. f. 2021. student disengagement in webbased videoconferencing supported online learning an activity theory perspective. interactive learning environments 120.
 marocco s. talamo a.  quintiliani f. 2024. from service design thinking to the third generation of activity theory a new model for designing aibased decisionsupport systems. frontiers in artificial intelligence 7 1303691.
 marocco s and talamo a 2022 the contribution of activity theory to modeling multiactor decisionmaking a focus on human capital investments. front. psychol. 13997062. doi 10.3389fpsyg.2022.997062
 martínezálvarez p. lópezvelásquez a.  kajamaa a. 2021. preparing educators for inclusive bilingual education a boundary crossing laboratory between professional groups. culturalhistorical psychology 173 125134.
 mbelani m. 2018. change laboratory workshop methodology in transforming visual literacy a case of cartoons in english first additional language. journal for language teaching 521 82104.
 mcclure a. patel z. ziervogel g.  hardman j. 2023. exploring the role of transdisciplinary learning for navigating climate risks in african cities the case of lusaka zambia. environmental science  policy. 149. 103571. 10.1016j.envsci.2023.103571.
 meijer l. j. de groot e. damoiseaux r. kearney g.  schellevis f. 2023. how to facilitate collaborative continuing and expansive learning? european journal of university lifelong living 72 2736.
 miles r. 2021. a change laboratory a collective approach to addressing issues in laptopmediated english language classrooms doctoral dissertation lancaster university.
 miles r. 2022. the insider change laboratory in practice. studies in technology enhanced learning.
 moffitt p. 2022. redesigning online mentoring schemes for faculty managers in vocational education and training the developmental role of primary contradictions. studies in technology enhanced learning.
 moffitt p. 2019. transformative agency for the collaborative and futureoriented redesign of activity in military higher education empowering participants to change their boundarycrossing technology enhanced learning. lancaster university united kingdom.
 moffitt p.  bligh b. 2021. online tasks and students transformative agency doublestimulation as a design principle for synchronous online workshops. journal of vocational education  training 124.
 montes p. a. g. martínez j. s.  romero a. 2022. contradictions in learning to teach digital literacy practices in an efl public setting an activity theory analysis. íkala revista de lenguaje y cultura 271 105124.
 morselli d.  sannino a. 2021. testing the model of double stimulation in a change laboratory. teaching and teacher education 97 103224.
 morselli d. 2021. a threelevels analysis of double stimulation in a change laboratory. journal of workplace learning.
 nikou s.a. student motivation and engagement in maker activities under the lens of the activity theory a case study in a primary school. j. comput. educ. 2023.
 niy d. y. oliveira v. c. d. oliveira l. r. d. alonso b. d.  diniz c. s. g. 2019. overcoming the culture of physical immobilization of birthing women in brazilian healthcare system? findings of an intervention study in são paulo brazil. interfacecomunicação saúde educação 23.
 nuttall j. 2022. formative interventions and the ethics of double stimulation for transformative agency in professional practice. pedagogy culture  society 301 111128.
 oliveira juliano  cassandre marcio  r. s. t. a. elias sara. 2023. entrepreneurial learning based on the zone of proximal development. entrepreneurship education and pedagogy. 251512742311791. 10.117725151274231179193.
 pammerschindler v.  prilla m. 2021. the reflection object an activitytheory informed concept for designing for reflection. interacting with computers 333 295310.
 papadopoulos dimitrios. 2024. individualising processes in adult education the case of swedish for immigrants sfi.
 parameswaran vijaya lyytinen kalle aron david and stange kurt activity theory analysis of the drivers of telemedicine a mixed methods study 2024. hawaii international conference on system sciences 2024 hicss57. 3.
 peng y. 2024. reconciling the evolving conceptualisations of language teacher cognition from an activity theory perspective. asiapacific journal of teacher education 522 226240.
 pettersen j. m.  xenofontos c. 2023. the construction of mathematical identities among early adolescents. cogent education 101.
 edited by katerina plakitsi and sylvie barma. 2023. sociocultural approaches to stem education  an iscar international collective issue. cham switzerland springer
 plakitsi k. kolokouri e.  kornelaki a. c. 2016. on the way out of poverty action through participatory methods to meet the right of living in sustainability. διδασκαλία των φυσικών επιστημών έρευνα  πράξη 201658 1018.
 popov j. learning in unaccredited internship as development of interns horizontal expertise. vocations and learning 17 277295 2024.
 poquet o. 2024. a shared lens around sensemaking in learning analytics what activity theory definition of a situation and affordances can offer. british journal of educational technology 55 18111831.
 prokopis d. sannino a.  mykkänen a. 2022. toward a new beginning exploring the instructional dynamics of expansive learning with workers in a youth supported housing unit. journal of workplace learning aheadofprint.
 quinn f. hobbs l. im on my own and im not trained a culturalhistorical activity theory analysis of teaching mathematics outoffield in a small school. int j of sci and math educ 2024.
 race a. i. 2023. resisting andor expanding through hybridity an examination of how teachers negotiate equitable fieldbased education in theory and practice. uc santa cruz. proquest id race_ucsc_0036e_12752. merritt id ark13030m5fc2sqw. retrieved from
 rikke b. bøje 2021. development of transitional care through expansive learning doctoral theses from aarhus univerityhealth.
 riss u. ziegler m.  smith l. 2023. value dimensions of digital applications and services the example of voice assistants. international journal of web engineering and technology 184 319343.
 ritella g.  hakkarainen k. 2012. instrumental genesis in technologymediated learning from double stimulation to expansive knowledge practices. international journal of computersupported collaborative learning 72 239258.
 romero m.  barma s. 2022. analysing an interactive problemsolving task through the lens of double stimulation. the canadian journal of learning and technology 481 91113.
 rosenblad n. 2023. knowledge and agency in vocational education an analysis of competencybased training and student counselling utilising a lens of critical realism to cultural historical activity theory.
 roxburgh j. analysis of tensions in the published literature into why lurkers do not post in asynchronous discussion boards in higher education contexts.
 russell d. r. 2023. motivation and genre as social action a phenomenological perspective on academic writing. frontiers in psychology 14 1226571.
 sabbah l. 1970 investigating remote teaching through culturalhistorical activity theory a case study in lebanon issn 24359467  the barcelona conference on education 2023 official conference proceedings pp. 659674
 sagre a. rivera j. d. h. montes p. g. posada t. b. machado l. p.  humanez l. e. g. 2021. contradictions and critical praxis in foreign language teachers implementation of reading to learn. teaching and teacher education 108 103516.
 sannino a. 2008. from talk to action experiencing interlocution in developmental interventions. mind culture and activity 153 234257.
 sannino a. 2010. teachers talk of experiencing conflict resistance and agency. teaching and teacher education 264 838844.
 sannino a. engeström y.  jokinen e. 2021. digital peer learning for transformative professional agency the case of homelessness practitioners in finland. british journal of educational technology.
 sannino a. engeström y.  lemos m. 2016. formative interventions for expansive learning and transformative agency. journal of the learning sciences 254 599633.
 schmidt m.  tawfik a. a. n.d.. activity theory as a lens for developing and applyingpersonas and scenarios in learning experience design. in m. schmidt ed. a coursereader for learning experience design. edtech books.
 shachak a. buchanan f.  kuziemsky c. 2024. when rules turn into tools an activity theorybased perspective on implementation processes and unintended consequences. healthcare management forum 373 177182.
 shakhsi dastgahian e.  scull j. 2021. implementing english language teaching reforms through professional learning. education inquiry 117.
 shani m. tal p. and margolin l. 2023 the future of clinical supervision in teacher education from a single supervisor to academiaschool leadership tean journal online first pp. 7892.
 siljebo j. 2024. we have we had a digital debt  a case of digitalized school leadership practice. learning media  technology. epub ahead of print.
 simeonova boyka kelly paul r. karanasios stan and galliers robert d. 2024 power as presentinactions in mundane information systems work journal of the association for information systems 254 867889.doi 10.177051jais.00876
 simon n. leonard  deborah devis  belinda macgill  paul unsworth  jill colton  sam fowler 2023. enhancing empathy for justice a methodology for expansive teacher professional development through creative bodybased learning sustainability mdpi vol. 161 pages 116 december.
 skåland g.  arnseth h. c. 2023. making the library of the future identifying the zone of proximal development for a norwegian public library makerspace. mind culture and activity 3034 261278.
 snyder e.  witmer s. e. 2024. including english learners in multitiered systems of support mtss in reading a chatinformed mixed methods investigation. preventing school failure alternative education for children and youth 111.
 sosa díaz m. j.  garrido arroyo m. d. c. 2021. community ecology and learning by expanding. a learning community for educational transformation. pedagogika 2021 t. 142 nr. 2 p. 4370.
 souto daise  santos pamella. 2023. interdisciplinarity with digital mathematical cartoons during emergency remote teaching in elementary school. revista internacional de pesquisa em educação matemática. 13. 118. 10.37001ripem.v13i3.3359.
 spante m. moffitt p. bligh b. lemonie y. matsmoto r. munday d.  redmond f. 2023. why do an online change laboratory? bureau de change laboratory.
 spante m. moffitt p. bligh b. lémonie y. matsmoto r. munday d. nodder j. querol m.  redmond f. 2023. why do an online change laboratory?. bureau de change laboratory. 10.214283033cbff.17652647.
 spante m. varga a.  carlsson l. 2021. triggering sustainable professional agency using change laboratory to tackle unequal access to educational success collectively.  journal of workplace learning.
 sultana jakia karanasios stan and teoh say yen theorising blockchain in supply chain activities with activity theory 2023. acis 2023 proceedings. 2.
 swanberg m. woodsonsmith s. pangaro l. torre d.  maggio l. 2021. factors and interactions influencing direct observation a literature review guided by activity theory. teaching and learning in medicine 112.
 tegama n. 2023. how do health professionals in a kenyan health facility learn to tackle antimicrobial resistance? phd thesis the open university. doi
 tessier v. 2022. expansive learning for collaborative design. design studies 83 101135.
 tessier v.  zahedi m. 2022. activity theory as a framework for understanding framing complexity of design projects. drs2022 bilbao 25.
 teräs m.  lasonen j. 2013. the development of teachers intercultural competence using a change laboratory method. vocations and learning 61 107134.
 tlili a denden m duan a padillazea n huang r sun t and burgos d 2022 gamebased learning for learners with disabilitieswhat is next? a systematic literature review from the activity theory perspective. front. psychol. 12814691. doi 10.3389fpsyg.2021.814691
 touati n ruelland i rodriguez del barrio l bouchard m beaulieu k courcy i. can implementing new services organization models to better meet the needs of young people bring about practice changes? analysis of an experiment in québec. health serv insights. 2024 feb 151711786329241232299. doi 10.117711786329241232299. pmid 38371331 pmcid pmc10874162.
 uffen i. de vries s. goei s. l. van veen k.  verhoef n. 2022. understanding teacher learning in lesson study through a culturalhistorical activity theory lens. teaching and teacher education 119 103831.
 utterberg modén m. 2021. teaching with digital mathematics textbooksactivity theoretical studies of datadriven technology in classroom practices. doctoral theses from university of gothenburg gupea.ub.gu.se
 van den berg m. voordijk h.  adriaanse a. 2021. bim uses for deconstruction an activitytheoretical perspective on reorganising endoflife practices. construction management and economics 39 4 323339.
 vartiainen h.  tedre m. 2024. how texttoimage generative ai is transforming mediated action. ieee computer graphics and applications 442 1222.
 vetoshkina l.  paavola s. 2021. from the abstract to the concrete and beyond the winding road of constructing a conceptual framework. outlines.
 vides contreras o. 2021. examining contradictions in theoretical and practical understandings of formal concepts of learningteaching among teacher educators.
 villaochoa j. a. molinatoro j. f.  borba m. c. 2022. roles of technologies for future teaching in a pandemic activity agency and humanswithmedia. zdmmathematics education 114.
 villemain a.  lémonie y. 2021. collective activation of enacted resilience in managing unthoughtof situations an examination of the reconstruction of a critical situation on the polar traverse. journal of contingencies and crisis management.
 virkkunen j.  tenhunen e. 2010. finding a concept that integrates specialists knowhow the case of special school for handicapped and neurologically ill children. actio 3 123.
 virkkunen j. newnham d. s. nleya p.  engeström r. 2012. breaking the vicious circle of categorizing students in school. learning culture and social interaction 134 183192.
 vogel c. mukute m. coetzer k.  gwata m. 2021. creating a climate of change in the city of johannesburg colearning to adapt to climate change. south african journal of science 117910 112.
 von fircks e. 2022. interdependence and cultural resources to mediate change what was missing in engeströms third generational activity theory. human arenas 113.
 vänninen i. querol m. p.  engeström y. 2021. double stimulation for collaborative transformation of agricultural systems the role of models for building agency. learning culture and social interaction 30 100541.
 wells patrick 2023 high school science teacher remote lesson study growth of pedagogical content knowledge development of remote science inquiry instruction and secondgeneration activity theory analysis of mediation and expansive learning. doctoral phd thesis memorial university of newfoundland.
 willocks k. e. 2022. making leadership as practice development visible learning from activity theory. management learning 13505076221105870.
 witkop c. t. maggio l. a. harvey e. j.  torre d. m. 2021. seeing complexity cultural historical activity theory chat as a lens for shared decision making. academic medicine journal of the association of american medical colleges.
 webb a. s.  welsh a. j. 2021. serendipitous conversations the 10year journey in becoming sotl scholars and educators. international journal for academic development 114.
 yu w. 2023. the dimensions of expansive learning in the workplace a multicase study from activity theory. psychology in the schools 60 43324349.
 zhang f. y. 2024. teachers boundary crossing for continuing professional development during the covid19 through the lens of culturalhistorical activity theory a case study of a novice chinese language teacher in a uk school. european education 561 92111.
 publicera dokument i optimizely f.d episerver
 1. p. karimi t. raza j. andersson le svensson influence of laser exposure time and point distance on 75μmthick layer of selective laser melted alloy 718 int j adv manuf technol. vol. 94 pp. 21992207 2017. doi 10.1007s0017001710191.
 2. andreas segerstark joel andersson larserik svensson and olanrewaju ojo microstructural characterization of laser metal powder deposited alloy 718 materials characterization 142 pp. 550559 2018.
 3. chamara kumara dunyong deng johan moverare per nylèn modelling of anisotropic elastic properties in alloy 718 built by electron beam melting materials sci. technology vol. 34 pp.529537 2017.
 4. p. karimi d. deng h. gruber j. andersson and p. nylén influence of build layout and orientation on microstructural characteristics of electron beam melted alloy 718 int j adv manuf technol. vol. 99 pp. 29032913 2018.  published 2018.
 5. tahira raza joel andersson  larserik svensson 2018 varestraint weldability testing of additive manufactured alloy 718 science and technology of welding and joining vol. 23 pp.606611 2017. doi 10.108013621718.2018.1437338.
 6. claes fredriksson sustainability of metal powder additive manufacturing proc. 6th global conference on sustainable manufacturing lexington kentucky usa 24 october 2018 procedia manufacturing vol. 33 pp 139144 2019.
 7. b. arun ramanathan et al. influence of defects and asbuilt surface roughness on fatigue properties of additively manufactured alloy 718 mater. sci. eng. a vol. 735 pp. 463474 sep. 2018.
 8. paria karimi esmaeil sadeghi pia åkerfeldt joakim ålgårdh joel andersson influence of successive thermal cycling on microstructure evolution of ebmmanufactured alloy 718 in trackbytrack and layerbylayer design journal of materials  design vol. 160 pp. 427441 2018. doi 10.1016j.matdes.2018.09.038.
 9. sneha goel magnus ahlfors fouzi bahbou shrikant joshi effect of different posttreatments on the microstructure of ebmbuilt alloy 718 journal of materials engineering and performance vol. 28 pp. 673680 2019.
 10. chamara kumara andreas segerstark fabian hanning nikhil dixit shrikant joshi johan moverare per nylén microstructure modelling of laser metal powder directed energy deposition of alloy 718 additive manufacturing vol. 25 pp.357364 2019.
 11. paria karimi esmaeil sadeghi joakim ålgårdh joel andersson ebmmanufactured single tracks of alloy 718 influence of energy input and focus offset on geometrical and microstructural characteristics journal of materials characterization 148 2019 8899
 12. sneha goel anumat sittiho indrajit charit uta klement shrikant joshi effect of posttreatments under hot isostatic pressure on microstructural characteristics of ebmbuilt alloy 718 additive manufacturing vol. 28 pp. 727737 2019.
 13. b. arun ramanathan et al. microstructural influence on fatigue crack propagation during high cycle fatigue testing of additively manufactured alloy 718 mater. charact. vol. 149 pp. 8294 mar. 2019
 14. b. arun ramanathan et al. additive manufacturing of alloy 718 via electron beam melting effect of posttreatment on the microstructure and the mechanical properties materials 12 68 2019.
 15. chamara kumara dunyong deng fabian hanning morten raanes johan moverare per nylén prediction of the microstructure evolution in electron beam melting of alloy 718 with phasefield modelling accepted to metallurgical and materials transactions a vol. 50 pp. 25272537 2019.
 16. b. arun ramanathan et al. microstructure tailoring in electron beam powder bed fusion additive manufacturing and its potential consequences results in materials vol. 1 article id 100017 2019.
 17. p. karimi e. sadeghi j. ålgårdh p. harlin and j. andersson effect of build location on microstructural characteristics and corrosion behavior of ebpbf built alloy 718 int j adv manuf technol. vol. 106 pp. 35973607 2020.
 18. paria karimi christopher schnur esmaeil sadeghi and joel andersson contour design to improve topographical and microstructural characteristics of alloy 718 manufactured using electron beampowder bed fusion journal of additive manufacturing published vol. 32 article id 101014 2020 doi.org10.1016j.addma.2019.101014.
 19. agnieszka kisielewicz et al. inprocess spectroscopic detection of chromium loss during directed energy deposition of alloy 718. materials  design vol. 186 article id 108317 2020.
 20. sreekanth s. ghassemali e. hurtig k. joshi s. andersson j. 2020. effect of direct energy deposition process parameters on singletrack deposits of alloy 718. metals 10 96 2020.
 21. s. goel k. bourreau  j. olsson  u. klement and s. joshi can appropriate thermal posttreatment make defect content in asbuilt electron beam additively manufactured alloy 718 irrelevant? materials vol. 13 pp. 536 2020.
 22. b. arun ramanathan et al. anisotropic fatigue properties of alloy 718 manufactured by electron beam powder bed fusion international journal of fatigue article id 105898 2020.
 23. c. kumara a. r. balachandramurthi s. goel f. hanning and j. moverare toward a better understanding of phase transformations in additive manufacturing of alloy 718 materialia vol. 13 no. june article id 100862 sep. 2020.
 24. t. gundgire s. goel u. klement s. joshi response of different electron beam melting produced alloy 718 microstructures to thermal posttreatments mat. charac. vol. 167 p. 110498 2020.
 25. s. goel h. mehtani s.w. yao i. samajdar u. klement s. joshi asbuilt and posttreated microstructures of an electron beam melting ebm produced nickel based superalloy metal.  mat. trans. a vol. 51 pp. 65466559 2020.
 26. s. goel e. zaninelli j. gårdstam u. klement s. joshi microstructure evolution based design of thermal posttreatments for ebmbuilt alloy 718 journal of materials science vol. 56 pp. 52505268 2020.
 publicerade rapporter i korthet
 cedersund e. eriksson l. ringsby jansson b. and svensson l. a. 2021. social pedagogy versus social work in a swedish context. international journal of social pedagogy 101 13. länk
 molin m. 2020. the emerging concepts of participation and belonging in social pedagogy. papers of social pedagogy. vol. 13 no 1. p. 933.länk
 cedersund e. eriksson l. ringsby jansson b.  svensson l. a. 2019. social pedagogical practices in swedish welfare contexts. international journal of social pedagogy 71 7.länk
 publishing
 a website is never finished but needs to be constantly kept alive with new content which both your visitors and google like.
 all web editors are involved in creating content on   which is our digital shop window
 training sessions in optimizely former name episerver
 basic course
 new web editors must undergo training in web publishing in order to publish on hv.se web.
 review of the basic features of the tool.
 what the tool looks like and how to navigate
 how to find a page in the tree structure how to edit and publish your changes
 what you need to keep in mind when working with the text on a page e.g. preamble heading levels and bullet points
 how to post an image on a page
 how to create links
 book your basic course by sending an email to hanna.timring@hv.se.
 after the basic course it is possible to take a supplementary course. there you will learn more about different page types blocks listings among other things.
 manuals and instructions
 push to go anmälan
 wednesday the 24th of april you are most welcome to meet your fellow outgoing students our student ambassadors who has been abroad and some of our incoming students from the places to which you are going.
 the idea of the push to go mingle is to create an event where students from our partner universities and students going to the same places can get together as a means to help preparing our outgoing students for their stay abroad.
 our student ambassadors will also be present. they all studied abroad last semester and will serve as contact person for those of you who are going for studies abroad next semester.
 international office and departmental coordinators will also be there.
 we will meet at 1630 in the creative center area by service center and then later on go inside for an after work together.
 please sign up in the web form below so we know how many will be coming.
 most welcome
 chatbot fas 3  itcf projekt
 dan nygren amazon web services  awsepost nygren@amazon.com
 andreas jonasson chalmersepost andreas@chalmers.se
 leverantör amazon web services  awsdan nygrenepost nygren@amazon.com
 participants must be admitted to thirdcycle program in work integrated and workplace learning or another relevant thirdcycle program.
 the focus of the course is to deliver knowledge and concept of quality and environmental management and related methods and tools to control improve and ensure the quality of products.
 special emphasis is placed on obtaining knowledge of different quality tools. the seven improvement tools are central to driving effective quality work as well as tools and statistical methods to understand variations of the concept such as statistical process control and skill studies are important methods. with regard to quality management iso 9000 will be introduced to students.
 students are also given insight into sustainability in industrial manufacturing. relevant iso standards e.g. iso 14000 will be introduced to students.
 quality assurance system for education
 quality assurance system of education
 university west has a cohesive quality assurance system for all education including thirdcycle education. the quality assurance system includes a plan for followups and evaluations as well as a plan for communication.
 enters into force 1 may 2022
 1 introduction
 quality of education arises primarily in the meeting between student and teacher but also in contacts with other employees at the university and the universitys collaboration partners. the students experience of quality is affected by many different factors such as expectations course structure pedagogy accessibility treatment and communication. systematic quality work therefore needs to cover the whole.
 systematic quality work includes creating conditions planning implementing following up and improving the education process from the time the student applies for an education until the degree is taken.
 university wests quality system describes processes that create good conditions for early quality assurance of education namely to establish educational programs establish main study areas establish degrees determine program offerings prepare study plans prepare course syllabi and establish course offerings.
 the quality system also describes processes for planning education and clarifies who is responsible for the process which external and internal requirements govern and which systems and  or checklists support the process.
 the intranet contains information and tips for teachers course and program managers prior to course planning and semester start planning to help and support and to ensure that students receive the best possible introduction and start. how the students experienced information introduction etc. is followed up in the beginners survey.
 planning implementing and evaluating teaching is within the framework of the teachers competence and academic freedom. external and internal regulations govern the parts of the implementation that apply to for example course memoranda and examinations. on the intranet there is support for teachers regarding the implementation of courses with digital tools and flexible training higher education pedagogy grade reporting et c.
 5 evaluate investigate and follow up education
 all education is followed up at regular intervals and according to an established structure.
 course evaluation is done after each course.
 education programs are followed up through annual program reports as well as through the program survey which is aimed at students in their final semester.
 in addition all training programs undergo an external quality review every six years.
 third cycle education is followed up through special quality reports every other year.
 alumni followup is done every three years.
 disciplinary matters and student complaints are followed up annually.
 to ensure responsibility schedule and communication about the followups that are made there is a followup schedule see appendix 1 and a communication plan see appendix 2.
 6 develop and improve
 all followup and evaluation of education is reported to the universitys management team at its annual strategy day for education. based on the results decisions are made on possible measures at operational and strategic level. the proposed measures are documented followed up and reported back no later than next years strategy day for education.
 twice a year an overall quality report is submitted to the university board.
 results based on quality reviews followups and measures are communicated to relevant stakeholders according to a special communication plan see appendix 2.
 the vicechancellor is ultimately responsible for the quality of the education and creates conditions through decisions in accordance with the universitys rules of procedure and the vicechancellors delegation rules. the vicechancellor has through the universitys management group has an annual cycle for strategic issues where education is a theme for annual followup and strategic discussion. followups according to a special schedule see appendix 1 provide a basis for discussion prior to strategic and operational decisions.
 the head of department is responsible for creating conditions planning and following up education at departmental level and other matters in accordance with the universitys rules of procedure and the vicechancellors delegation rules. the head of department may decide on further followup of educations at the department in addition to what is specified in the quality assurance system for education. all training including independent courses course packages and commissioned training must be followed up and the followup must take place systematically and be documented. student complaints must also be documented and followed up.
 the head of department appoints program managers program councils and examiners and ensures that the appointees have the right competence knowledge and conditions for the assignment.
 the program manager is appointed by the head of department and the responsibility is stated in the description of responsibilities at departmental level. the program manager has a special responsibility for student contacts within the program.
 program councils are appointed by the head of department and areas of responsibility appear from the universitys rules and guidelines for education at undergraduate and advanced level.
 8.6 teacher
 each teacher is responsible for planning and implementing teaching and supervision in accordance with syllabi study plans individual study plans and other rules and guidelines. each teacher is responsible for following their individual competence development and merit plan and for giving feedback to their head of department if the tasks cannot be carried out as planned.
 the examiners responsibilities are stated in the universitys rules and guidelines for education at undergraduate and advanced level. the examiner has the overall responsibility for the course being completed with a connection between national and local goals learning activities and examination.
 8.9 university director
 the university director is responsible for creating conditions planning and following up that infrastructure and support functions for education are correctly dimensioned. the administrations subdivision heads are responsible for staffing and planning for their employees and ensure that the employees have the right skills knowledge and conditions for the tasks.
 8.10 head of student support library and educational development sbip
 processes that are systematically followed up evaluated developed and documented are study guidance support for students with special needs writing guidance and other student support linked to the library as well as processes for promoting digital competence development and higher education pedagogy.
 8.11 quality manager
 the universitys quality manager is responsible for updating and in dialogue with the vicechancellor and quality council evaluating and developing the universitys operating system quality system and quality assurance system.
 8.12 quality council
 fun decides according to the vicechancellors delegation on guidelines and rules for education. in the annual followup work fun compiles a universitywide quality report with analysis of strengths and areas for improvement in educational programs at undergraduate and advanced level independent courses and commissioned training.
 in a similar way fun monitors the quality of postgraduate education through quality reports with analysis of strengths and areas for improvement compiled by subject councils. the board reports the results to the universitys management group and provides feedback to the department boards and subject councils. fun is also responsible for compulsory syllabi at postgraduate education level in accordance with the universitys rules and guidelines for postgraduate education. if necessary fun can initiate thematic random checks or control of special parts of the education.
 8.14 third cycle education council
 subject councils for each program at third cycle level are appointed by fun and are responsible for decisions according to further delegation from fun.
 8.15 institutional faculty boards in
 the responsibilities of the department faculty boards are stated in their job description. among other things in is responsible for ensuring that course syllabi at the undergraduate and advanced level are in accordance with the universitys rules and guidelines for education at the undergraduate and advanced level.
 in the followup work in is responsible for annually requesting quality reports from the departments education program program report and every other year requesting a report regarding quality in independent courses and commissioned training. if necessary in may request supplementation of these documents. in analyzes and provides feedback to the program councils and to the department management in connection with identified development areas and annually follows up the departments action plan for improvements. at the beginning of each year in compiles an overall report on the quality of education to fun. if necessary in can initiate thematic random checks or control of special parts of the education.
 appendix 1 followup schedule quality assurance of education
 appendix 2 plan for communication of quality assurance training
 quality control in welding applications parttime campus kvs700
 the course provides insight into quality control methods applied in the welding industry by providing an overview of how to develop manage monitor and control quality and sustainability in welding production. the procedure for testing welded parts using different test methods is studied and examples are given linked to the relevant welding standards.
 vsk600academic writing and
 sjl600welding metallurgy of ironbased alloys or the equivalent.
 the quality policy is included in the universitys operational management system and clarifies the universitys view on quality.
 university wests quality culture is anchored in strategies effective internal decisionmaking processes and structures that support the quality work. our quality culture is effective in the sense that it is based on dialogue and openness that engages all the universitys employees students and collaboration partners. our quality work must be systematic and lead to high quality for the university as a whole and in all its parts. systematic quality assurance work requires both good documentation and followup.
 this means that
 all employees at university west have a responsibility to contribute to university west being perceived as reliable trustworthy legal and inclusive.
 all employees have a quality responsibility which means constantly striving to improve the activities carried out and learning from experiences with reflection consideration and courage.
 we challenge and want to be challenged to improve ourselves our skills and our business by being generous offensive inclusive and crazy enough in accordance with our core values.
 the work at university west is characterized by high quality. there is an ongoing systematic work with quality at the university aiming to continually revise all aspects of work conducted at the university and create suitable routines.
 quality improvement work includes many dimensions and is a continuous process. the focus of the quality improvement work at university west is on the area of educational quality how frames and conditions for how our main process the students path through university and studies can be quality assured. the staffs skill and knowledge is a key factor here together with the ability of the educational organization and support functions to facilitate the main process.
 followups and evaluations are central in the quality of work surrounding the education. several programme evaluations are performed annually.
 quality assurance system education
 to system
 monitoring study environment  support
 to results
 monitoring education
 external quality reviews
 external education reviews
 swedish higher education authority ukä
 european association for quality assurance
 in order to explain relationships between various economic phenomena and to foresee what is going to happen in the future economists use models. for example a model of a market shows the relationships between supply demand and price and also how price is affected if demand andor supply changes. although most models can be described verbally they can normally be represented more precisely in graphical or mathematical form. this implies that mathematics is an important tool in order to apply the economic models. therefore a number of mathematical elements are presented in the course. the mathematics is not an end in itself in the course focus is more on applications within micro macro and financial economics where mathematics is functioning as a tool. the course also covers elementary statistics and regression analysis to show how the economic relationships can be estimated.
 studentcounsellor for programmes and courses in manufacturing engineering robotics and automation electrical engineering elechtromechanical vehicle engineering and bachelor in international mechanical engineering
 bachelors and masters programmes taught in english
 rashid ali is working as a lecturer at the division of mathematics computer and surveying engineering university west sweden. he is a dedicated professional with a strong academic and industry background. he earned his b.s. degree in information technology in 2007. subsequently he obtained m.s. degrees in computer science and informatics from university west sweden and his ph.d. in information and communication engineering from yeungnam university south korea in 2019.
 charlotta andersson jonssonservice  itavdelningencharlotta.anderssonjonsson@hv.se0520  22 37 31
 repair  largescale reuse of forged and cast steel components through new am repair
 the goal is to reuse endoflife largescale pipe blanks from the energy sector which are then repaired with am and adapted for circular design. this creates a significantly more sustainable cycle where several tens of tons of steel parts are reused instead of recycled. the circular design creates the possibility for recurring repair and thus planned ageing.
 today forgings and castings are used for the manufacture of larger rotationally symmetrical steel components  such as coupling elements rotors turbines and generators for the energy sector. these are socially critical products that are in the order of 15 meters long and up to 1 m in diameter. one of the biggest challenges today is that these complex components take a long time to manufacture. it is not unusual for the delivery time i.e. from order to delivered product to be between 15 weeks and up to a year. it is also not economically justifiable to keep these in stock. it is thus a problem for many industries in the energy sector to get hold of these components ondemand which is particularly important to ensure sustainable and continuous operation. the technical solution that the project intends to further develop consists of manufacturing large rotationally symmetrical components with a more flexible economically more defensible and also energyefficient manufacturing method namely additive manufacturing with powder arc welding up called saam. this is done by additively depositing layer upon layer of steel onto a spent pipe to progressively repair the product. the saam process is significantly faster than conventional additive manufacturing am because the method is based on powder arc welding which is a very productive welding method but it is also significantly less explored. the challenge is to be able to control material supply with sufficient precision and to reach high demands on material properties in the product in order to achieve a sustainable circular design.
 information for you who wants to apply for a reregistration on an unfinished course.
 a reregistration is necessary when you need to follow lectures on an unfinished course retake the whole course. you can apply for a reregistration at the earliest 4 weeks before the course starts and no later than the course has started by filling out the form on the link below.
 in some cases you may be notified if your reregistration is granted or not after the course has started. you will then be notified by email.
 important information
 if you only want to do a reexamination or submit an assignment you need access to the learning platform canvas only. give yourself access to the current course in canvas by using the form access to a course in canvas instead.
 if you are already registered for 45 he credits you must contact a study counsellor before applying for reregistration.
 if you need study guidance or help with study technique contact a study counsellor by emailing servicecenter@hv.se.
 reregistration for a course
 reading list
 how to find course literature for your education. get tips on where to get course literature. library bookstore etc.
 course literature at the library
 gregarts student bookstore on the college campus
 other ways to find course literature
 via canvass learning platform you get access to coursespecific material schedule course syllabus and reading list.
 you can find course syllabi for each programme on
 the regular course literature is available at the university library. usually there is a copy for loan and a reference copy that is not lent out but can be read in the library. more information on how to borrow can be found on the librarys website.
 gregarts student books can be found in the bbuilding floor 2 b217 . here you will find new and used books compendiums and other course literature. we also sell office supplies at student prices. gregarts can also help sell your used textbooks.
 mondaythursday 09001500friday 09001400closed for lunch 11301200
 compendium reserving or ordering books and other information info.gregart@gmail.com
 tips for getting hold of literature in other ways
 gregarts student books helps sell your used books
 university library university west
 book exchange buy  sell
 the student monkey
 course literature marketplace for used course literature
 for salebuying forum under the student unions website
 tradera marketplace for among other things course literature
 libris24 buying and selling market for used textbooks
 bokus marketplace for secondhand course literature
 mystudentstore  used course literature
 in each student kitchenette there is a bulletin board for advertising.
 syllabus for your education
 in english below
 as a librarian i work with information literacy within the engineering programs. i also work in the library help desk chat and digital zoom room with guidance in information literacy word referencing et cetera.
 in the language resource centre i work mainly with reading techique support and study skills connected to reading. i offer individual tutoring sessions as well as lectures and workshops in classes. i write and edit the information about reading academic literature on the open canvas course from the language resource centre in swedish only.
 si means supplemental instruction. the purpose of si is to enhance the learning of a subject and offer the students the possibility to share thoughts course content and ideas with each other. as an si supervisor i recruit and educate si leaders and give them continual support and guidance.
 adriaan is an english teacher at a secondary school in the netherlands and is tasked with leading the schools pedagogical innovation team.  the school has an interesting history as being one of the countrys most progressive and wellknown schools in the 1900s but struggling to find their direction in recent decades. adriaan has secured a 5year phd grant to organize change labs to aid his school  in addition to his teaching job. in combination with a visit to cradle at helsinki university he also visited cat to learn about the history wall tool when conducting a cl.
 in case of emergency collaboration exercises at the boundaries between emergency service organizations
 abstract endue to the emergent and dynamic nature of incidents the complexity of emergency work is often referred to as a challenge for learning. another recurrent challenge in emergency work is that of collaboration at and across established organizational boundaries involving actors with specific types of expertise who are operating under different regulations and responsibilities. in addition training emergency service organizations in collaboration remains a challenge. in light of the difficulties and shortcomings that have been identified in major incident responses the need for exercises for developing and maintaining collaborative response effectiveness prior to the next incident is often highlighted. the overall aim of this thesis is to understand how fullscale exercises can provide conditions for developing interorganizational collaboration between the police ambulance and rescue services at the incident site. learning activities that carry the potential to support and develop collaborative capacity and how the alignment of distributed expertise can be trained for were of particular interest. interviews with participants in eight fullscale exercises with professionals and interviews and observations of one exercise with seniorlevel students in sweden served as the empirical base.central concepts from culturalhistorical activity theory chat provided theoretical tools to explore the exercises and understand boundaries between organizations with a wider systemic approach. the empirical studies show that the participants understood fullscale exercises to be valuable opportunities for becoming involved in response work making decisions and acting and interacting in uncertain situations and realistic environments. as in reallife responses exercises are characterized by the stabilization and confirmation of everyday routines on the one hand and by improvisation and change on the other hand. the studies also show that exercises tend to focus on specific scenariosintraorganizational routines and leadership positions. infrequent exercises inwhich the participants were only trained in a limited role were perceived to be in adequate for developing preparedness and collaboration. however the analysis suggested that the way in which exercises were organized and performed had implications for how participants were trained in collaboration.realizing the potential of boundaries as resources for learning in exercises depends on how boundaries are explicated and approached. thus rather than striving to ignore or eliminate boundaries in exercises the studies illustrated the learning value of explicitly reflecting on the multiple understandings around boundaries. the studies demonstrated that much of the work at an incident site takes place around negotiations. collaboration at the incident site was not only aquestion about boundary crossing operational tasks may not always be aligned and have to be prioritized and sequenced. the exercises comprised work situations in which no single motive could explain or determine the collaborationdue to different types of expertise primary responsibilities and needs forinformation. these factors were understood in terms of the concepts of boundarywork and boundary awareness. these concepts point at a more divergent understanding of collaboration that reaches beyond striving to create mutual understanding between organizations in learning activities. differences between organizations such as in terminology time horizons priorities leadership structures understandings of safety and how intraorganizational decisions and actions could impact the collaborating organizations work were central triggers for discussion and negotiation. these differences required explanations in order to make the actions and decisions of one organization understandable and justifiable to another based on organizational mandates and types of expertise.giving emergency services the opportunity to work together to develop an awareness of their expectations of each other in various situations to use and interpret their own and others terminologies and to identify internal hierarchies and motives for prioritizations was essential dimensions of exercises
 expansive design for teachers an activity theoretical approach to design and work integrated learning
 the results point to how innovative educational design can have consequences for teachers work with conflicting needs tensions and contradictions at the systemic level of the activity. pd processes in educational settings require toolsand concepts to capture this complexity and create sustainable solutions. in this study activity theoretical models served as a collaborative tool for teachers to analyse and change their practice and to describe and explain work integrated learning in the design process. the work highlighted the need for teachers expertise in design as well as the important role of media literacy in the use of new technology. their active and practical engagement in the materials basedupon the tradition of pd must be understood as an important part of the development of agency and volition and findings suggest that the combination of pd and cl methodologies can serve as a vehicle for expansive learning and new innovative learning designs in educational settings. this approach was conceptualized as expansive design.
 coconstructing expertise competence development through workintegrated elearning in joint industryuniversity collaboration
 teaching with social robots
 abstract enthe schools digitalization is an ongoing process that brings new didactic opportunities but also challenges. social educational robots entail a complex teaching situation and affect the teachers role actions and responsibilities in the classroom. through observations in an authentic classroom context this thesis aims to provide a nuanced and realistic picture of how teaching with social robots can unfold. social educational robots have previously been explored in different educational contexts but few studies shed light on the teacher role. nor is it discussed what new aspects of digital competence become important when teaching with educational technologies that exhibit social behaviour. this thesis studies teacher actions and intended actions in a learning activity where a child collaborates with a social educational robot. in the activity the robot is designed to act as a learning companion tutee the child acts as a teacher tutor and sometimes a few peers participate. the study is based on video observations of teachers dialogues and behaviours in this learning activity and a total of 25 hours of recorded video material has been analysed. the observations are supplemented with interviews workshops and questionnaires where more teachers reflect on teaching with social robots.
 the result shows that social educational robots may contribute to relevant learning situations but also introduce new teacher roles bringing additional challenges. the teachers most prominent role in this learning activity is as an interaction mentor in which the teacher assists the verbal and nonverbal interaction between the child and the robot such as verbal communication fluency explaining the robots behaviour to the child and maintaining attention.the result also identifies challenges that may emerge if social educational robots are used for teaching and learning. one of these challenges is due to the teacher relating to the robot as a didactic tool as well as a social actor interchangeably. this duality causes conflicts in the teachers actions as the two perspectives call for different behaviours. the thesis also shows that using social educational robots entails new demands for adequate digital competence.
 recognition and grading system
 recognition means that you can use approved courses completed at another educational institution towards your degree.
 grading systems and ects grading table egt
 university west uses ects grading table egt.
 the ects grading table enables grades from different universities in different countries to be compared. each university use its local grading system but the egt shows the statistical distribution of these grades.
 university west uses four different grading systems
 two grade scale  failed or passed grade
 three grade scale  failed passed or passed with credit
 four grade scale  failed 3 4 or 5 grade 5 being passed with credit
 af grade scale  f e d c b or a f being fail grades and a being passed with distinction
 please find below a list of these grading scales in comparison to each other and percentage distribution between the levels within each.
 transcript of records achieved at university west will be sent to each incoming student individually and to the international office of their partner institution after the mobility but no later than within 5 weeks after end of semester.
 all international transcripts includes egt as a standard but as the egt is not given for coursescourse codes with fewer than two years data the distribution table below will also be included to support conversion for those grades where egt data is currently unavaliable for a completed course in the transcript issued.
 related documents
 egt information sheet
 how we handle the situation with corona
 information about university west and corona.
 more information to students and staff
 faq about campus travel health etc.
 faq about working from home travel health etc.
 for people with disabilities
 to the website of the swedish agency for participation
 there are many different ways to record movies to create digital course material. the ict educational developers and media technicians can support you with this.
 plan your recording
 record with the support of a media technician
 record in our selfservice studios
 screen recording
 publish your movie or audio recording
 there are a number of tools for creating different forms of digital course material what will work best can only be decided by you since you know your course and subject best. whatever method you choose there are a few things to consider
 clarity and conciseness
 its important to try to be short and concise regardless of form. feel free to think modularly  in terms of title so that your productions are short and concise. it is always better to divide the material into several parts than to try to imitate the classroom situation with a 45 minute lecture. some production methods such as sofa conversations between several participants often work in a slightly longer format while recorded reviews using powerpoint will quickly result in the audience losing interest if the recording is too long.
 always prioritize sound
 no matter what type of production you are making make sure to prioritize the sound. it does not matter how interesting the video material ppt images or other visuals are because it will fall flat if it is not possible to hear what is being said. always use a headset or other external microphone for your various recordings.
 use the possibilities of the medium
 try to exploit the potential of the chosen media form. if you have a lot of visual material to display the video format will work well. the same applies to laboratory work tests and processes. if on the other hand you are presenting pure theoretical reviews it may work just as well with a sound recording or with a voice over to a powerpoint. try to avoid including too much text information in your production as it quickly can become difficult to read and absorb.
 practice again and again
 remember to practice before you start your recording. to record is a new situation and there are several things to keep track of. also keep in mind that it does not matter if it goes wrong on the first try pause the work and try again because it is guaranteed to be better the second time. strive for a good enough quality for the purpose of the film and do not spend an unreasonable amount of time on details to reach perfection. if you have followed the advice above about trying to divide your work into smaller parts it will also be easier to remake.
 if you want to record video material and get a professional result the best way to do it is in our large studio. you get help from our media technicians with all technology and recording and you can concentrate on what needs to be said. read more about how the media technicians can help you.
 at campus there are two studios where you record on your own.
 recording studio  h109
 in the studio you can record yourself your screen or with a document camera. read more about the studio.
 lightboard studio  h106
 in the studio you write on a whiteboard made of glass that is filmed from the front. read more about the studio.
 a popular way to create course material is to record your screen along with your voice. screen recording is an easy way to make a video of your powerpoint by adding a voice to your slideshow. it can also be used to give instructions in software or talk about text displayed on the screen. there are several different ways to make a screen recording
 record with kaltura capture  a part of hv play
 the advantage of using kaltura capture is that the video is uploaded directly to hv play and can then be published on canvas or shared with a link. read more about kaltura capture.
 record with powerpoint
 you can use powerpoints features to make a video of your presentation. read more about recording in powerpoint.
 by starting a meeting without other participants you can use zoom for screen recording. read more about recording in zoom.
 creating audio files today is relatively easy as you can actually do it with your mobile phone or your computer and headset. if you want to take it a few steps further maybe it is a podcast together with some colleagues that is the best option for your course. our media technicians can always help if you need assistance with recording podcasts or other audio productions. contact the media technicians for more information.
 publish your video or audio recording
 once you have made your movie or audio recording it needs to be uploaded to a streaming service. university west has hv play. after uploading the film can be published at canvas or shared in another way. read more about how to use hv play.
 closer to 400 international students are arriving in trollhättan and at university west for the start of the fall semester. they come to study programmes or for exchange studies. india nepal and germany are some of the approximately 50 countries that you will be able find represented in the university classrooms.
 its fantastic to see so many international students on campus a result of our internationalization efforts says mats jägstam vicechancellor of university west.
 another highlighted factor for success is offering of programmes that meet the demands of both society and students.
 we work actively to create attractive programmes across a wide range of subjects to attract international talents and to strengthen our global recruitment explains tomas bengtsson responsible for international student recruitment.
 two of the masters programs that have had the most international applicants this year are the master in sustainable development and the master in operations and supply chain management which is starting for the first time this fall.
 chipiliro banda from malawi is one of many who have arrived at university west this week. he will study the master in cybersecurity.
 it feels great to be here and im very excited to become a part of university west says chipiliro banda. this has been a dream of mine that has now finally come true.
 the exchange student liu yifei has traveled from china to take courses in economics. she is also excited to be here. additionally her first impression of sweden so far is that it is warmer than she expected so far.
 record video in powerpoint
 the recording tool in powerpoint for windows has been significantly improved and now it is easy to make a video of a powerpoint presentation.
 if you have questions or want to know more contact the ict educational developers at akademus.
 how do i prepare for recording?
 how do i start a recording?
 how do i postprocess my recording?
 how do i make a screenrecording?
 how do i export the video?
 in order for the recording to go smoothly it is important to prepare.
 it is best to create a new presentation that is prepared from the start to use for recording. you can then make room in the presentation for your webcam image and adapt the content to match your script.
 save a copy to use for recording
 whether youre reusing a presentation or creating a new one its a good idea to make a copy of your presentation and make your recording in the copy. then you have the opportunity to use your original presentation as a normal powerpoint without the risk of your webcam recordings starting.
 split the presentation  make shorter videos
 if you have a long presentation divide it into several shorter parts and make a number of shorter videos. working with shorter videos has many advantages. for example you dont have to redo the entire long video if a small part of the content becomes outdated and you can easily use one of your shorter videos in another course.
 make the presentation independent in time and space
 let the presentation be as independent as possible by for example not writing the date semester and course code in the presentation. also remember not to verbally refer to other things in the course for example ... as we did last week... or ... in a previous film... and to use clothes that are seasonally neutral. then it will be easier to reuse your video.
 write notes
 your notes can be displayed as a teleprompter and are a good memory support during the recording.
 get the right equipment
 a headset provides the best sound when recording and no disturbing sounds from the surroundings are included in the video. always make a test recording to hear for yourself how the sound turns out in the video. with an external webcam it is easier to get a good angle on the webcam image.
 you can find the recording function at the top right.
 now the recording window opens. start by going through the settings according to the video below. make a test recording and when everything works as you intended youre ready to record.
 note no audio is recorded when you switch slides so pause when switching.
 once you have made a recording there is the option to rerecord a single slide or for the entire slide show. click the round arrow next to the record button.
 tip update your video
 if the content on a slide isnt relevant when you plan to use your video for a second time you can create a new version of the video.
 rerecord the slide that needs updating.
 remove the webcam to make it less obvious that the recording was done at different time.
 export a new version of your video.
 after the recording is done you can change where your webcam is placed on the slide. you can also change its size and trim the beginning and end. start by exiting the recording window with edit you will then return to that editing view. now you can postprocess your recording.
 if the webcam recording is circular and you want a square image instead you can select your video select video format and then reset design.
 screen recording is not done in the same place as recording with a webcam. instead open the record tab and select screen recording.
 select the area to record it can be a part of your screen or the whole screen. then start recording. when you are done move the mouse cursor to the top of the window and the menu with the stop function will appear. when the recording is finished you can move it around and resize it in the same way as with the webcam image.
 when the video is ready the last step is to export to a movie file that you can for example upload to hv play. on hv play you can then subtitle your video.
 click export.
 change the resolution to 720p. this is usually enough for this type of video. the export is also faster and the file is easier to handle.
 start the export with create video. it may take a while before the video is ready.
 recording studio
 how can i use the recording studio?
 the studio has a producer computer where you record your film with the program wirecast. there is a presentation computer where you display for example a presentation or a web page. you can also film with a document camera it is well suited for e.g. calculations. right in front of you is a camera and microphone. everything is set up for the best results so when you enter the studio just get started. the only thing you may need to adjust is the height of the camera. in the studio you will find a guide on how to use the system.
 example of a film recorded in the studio with camera presentation and document camera.
 recruitment of adjunct senior lecturer in the academy in the field of production technology
 go to your student email in the outlook web app.
 click the settings icon.
 choose  email forwarding.
 make your choices. check the box keep a copy of forwarded messages in case you want to save a copy of your student emails in the outlook web app also.
 remember to delete your forwarding when you no longer want it
 the video pauses and the student is given a question to reflect upon before continuing to watch the video.
 reflection questions are a way to encourage a more active viewing of a video. the video pauses at a certain point to give the viewer an opportunity to contemplate the question posed. no answers are submitted it is solely for selfreflection. you can incorporate one or several questions into the video.
 the video guide demonstrates how to insert reflection questions into your video on hv play english subtitles available
 do you want to learn more about hv play? you can find all the guides here.
 this page is no longer available for more information see the links below.
 to learning platform canvas
 to new student
 registration and fees nyris13
 registration fee includes admission to the conference and the exhibition conference documentation social event welcome reception lunches and coffee breaks.
 early  before march 31th 20161500 sek
 early  before march 31th 20161000 sek
 send in your abstract in a maximum of 300 words exkl. references in english swedish norwegian or danish. last date for call for abstracts extented time for submission of abstract til the 8th of november
 the contributions will be grouped into the parallel sessions according to the theme and the wished session format. in some cases the program committee can ask the participants to present their contribution in a different category then the initially wanted one. for registration see below.
 the registration is closed
 the fees for the conference are as following
 early bird fee                                               3800 sek   march 1st  july  15th
 standard fee                                               4320 sek    july 16th  august 31st
 early bird fee                                               2450 sek   march 1st  july 15th
 standard fee                                                2950 sek  july 16th  aug 31st
 accompanying person                               1270 sek
 all fees are in swedish krona sek including vat. if you have any questions regarding the registration process dont hesitate to contact us at olkc2022@hv.se
 2.3. examinationer
 3. examination
 3. examinationsformer
 5. anpassad examination
 6. omexamination
 heythe virtual computer room hvdesktop for more info click here will be reinstalled tomorrow 26th october between 16301900.
 this means that it will not be possible to connect to hvdesktop.
 the virtual computer room hvdesktop for more info click here will be reinstalled today 25012023 between 16301900.
 uppdaterad information  studenter
 ana esther bonilla hernandez
 se film om nicolaies forskning
 doktorsexamen i produktionsteknik on efficient use and integration of discrete event simulation in industry demontfort university leicester uk 2004
 the  contribution  from  this  project  will  be  to  achieve  genuine  concurrent  engineering  beyond frontloading through immersive application in both product design and production where immersive  technology  can  be  developed  and  used  as  a  dashboard  for  key  performance  indicator  kpi monitoring and planning. for this the focus is to develop and apply dynamic connections and integration  between  the  element  technologies  of  manufacturing  immersive  technologies  and  it  technologies. the recruitment project strives for an inclusive environment where multidisciplinary and  multiprofessionally  competences  and  experiences  can  be  joined  to  contribute  to  the  field  of  workintegrated learning with a particular focus on sociotechnical knowledge such as automation production technology information systems interaction design and behavioural sciences.
 remote laboratory sessions provides new opportunities for students
 university wests teachers in technology have developed new methods in order to be able to carry out laboratory sessions from home. they can now be held digitally just like other regular education. this has earlier been a challenge but the pandemic has accelerated the development. this is part of a longterm investment since the universitys goal is to make all longer educational programmes available for distance learning.
 the idea is that students will log on via a remote computer solution to do different laboratory sessions. that computer is connected to the iot internetofthings network that we have created at the production technology center ptc where we have our laboratory equipment.
 via the remote computer solution you can log in through the web browser on our robot amr autonomus mobile robot. you can then in real time control the robot and see it through an ip camera. this will take place in a secluded part of the ptc for safety reasons.
 see how the robot is controlled remotely
 how far have you come and what remains to be done?
 we have successfully tested connecting the amr and the iot network. we have tested all systems and hardware separately and they work now we need to create a student version that is easy to use. the physical installations will take place this autumn.
 which programs are influenced by working remotely like this?
 mainly the 2year master in robotics and automation. i also can imagine that the students studying computer science could be interested in this since there are many programming possibilities in python david simonsson concludes.
 more about master in robotics and automation
 repam aims to include the circular thinking during the whole material chain in the improvement of material design use and recycling.
 feedstock materials are widely not designed to work for am processes regarding complex thermal cycles and high temperature experiences and are not designed to be efficiently recycled. therefore repam will include the circular thinking during the whole material chain in the improvement of material design use and recycling. the repam project covers the entire process chain from material development to feedstock production manufacturing and recycling attempting to achieve the vision of enabling resourceefficient feedstock processing routes for additive manufacturing by reducing the virgin feedstock usage and promoting reuse of waste or recycled materials through innovations in material design processing production and recycling.
 remanufacturing and repair are of great interest for many industrial sectors not least for the regions aerospace and automotive industry as the technology enables the entire product and material life cycle to be considered. it can thus significantly increase resource efficiency for the entire product life cycle.
 objectives of the project
 remanufacturing and repair are of great interest for many industrial sectors not least for the regions aerospace and automotive industry as the technology enables the entire product and material life cycle to be considered.  it can thus significantly increase resource efficiency for the entire product life cycle.
 the project aims to offer a sustainable and energy efficient solution for responsible extraction and processing of titanium.
 offer a sustainable and energy efficient solution for responsible extraction and processing of titanium together with other primary raw and critical raw materials from strategic partner country ukraine to supply eu industrial value chains and strategic sectors with a net zerowaste approach. the titanium powder supplied from ukraine will thereafter be evaluated in four different user cases. one user case is led by university west where uw will manufacture a aerospace demonstrator component defined by gkn aerospace using powder bed fusion additive manufacturing and tipowder from the urkaine supplier. the demonstrator part will thereafter also be additive manufactured using a conventional available tipowder and the properties will be compared.
 request for exams answers
 fill in the form below to get access to other students graded exams. we will send you randomly selected exam answers with the highest grades.
 if you want answers from a specific date then note this in the form that is linked down below. you can request answers from maximum three dates per course code. if these fields are left empty we will send you what we have in our archive.
 please note that if you  during an examination  retell what someone else has written without naming the source this might count as plagiarism and lead to suspention. read more about plagirism here.
 fill in the form here
 requirements engineering parttime campus krh600
 introduction to software engineering and requirements engineering including requirements engineering in agile and iterativeincremental development. this covers requirements at different levels of abstraction and the specification of data requirements functional requirements and quality requirements nonfunctional requirements. the course also encompasses various techniques for requirements elicitation identification validation and prioritization.
 within a few years additive manufacturing with laser and wire for duplex stainless steel could be ready for actual industrial production. photo procada
 our scientists have more than 15 years of experience in am with laser and wire. this has enabled us to develop the technology for duplex stainless steel in a relatively short time. today expensive forgings are often used in the manufacture of highperformance components such as aircraft engine parts. in addition the lead time for this type of material is often long explains robert pederson professor in materials technology.
 significantly shorter production time
 additive manufacturing offers more efficient use of materials lower energy consumption and shorter lead times compared to traditional forging manufacturing methods which require extensive machining.
 our test with one of alfa lavals components shows that production time can be reduced from 20 weeks to just 2 weeks. scaling up the am process for serial production of two of their parts has the potential to save around 170 tonnes of material per year. this is equivalent to 170000 kg of co2 emissions.
 if the technology proves fully viable for serial production with these two components there is potential to expand with more of the companys parts robert notes.
 for am with laser and wire to succeed the entire manufacturing process must be automated robust and reliable. subsequently one important task for the project team has been to develop and build an automatic production system with closed loop control. in the summer of 2019 the team were able to do this for a scaleddown detail making them among the first in the world to use such a solution.
 the project team has also developed an advanced simulation model that provides increased process understanding by showing how different process parameters affect material quality.
 gkn aerospace has helped us to conduct validation experiments with titanium to validate the model for that material. the development of simulation models overlaps several different areas of expertise within the project and this approach has proven to be a strength in our work.
 for us both the expected cost reduction and the reduced co2 footprint of the material savings are of course very welcome says andreas bergman program manager alfa laval.
 when you then consider the potential to reduce capital that is tied up as a result of having to maintain inventory due to long and uncertain lead times we think were on to a real winner.
 in parallel with dedicate another 8year am project podfam is underway focussing on powderbased am.
 contact robert pederson professor in materials technology university west.
 fun ensures that the institutions activities meet defined quality standards.
 vice chairmanshåkan wirdelius professor sandra pennbrant university lecturer
 other membershåkan jansson senior lecturereva johansson senior lecturermartina wyszynska johansson senior lecturermonika hattinger senior lecturernataliya galan senior lecturer
 student and doctoral representativeselin strömbergivan andres castillo external memberslena magnusson åberg
 secretary of the boardmagdalena zawada
 techniques for manufacturing products based on powder metallurgy have been developed over the years for a variety of uses. today the interest in manufacturing with metal powder is perhaps greater than ever with a current focus on additive manufacturing also known as 3d printing.
 the industry foresees great opportunities
 additive manufacturing with metal powder brings unprecedented freedom of design both in terms of materials and the realization of complex geometries that were previously impossible to attain using conventional manufacturing technologies. adding to that the technology generates very little to no material waste. the product is printed layer by layer with the metal powder and does not require much finishing. the powder that remains after the components have been printed can be reused for another print which results in a highly sustainable production process. the many advantages of this manufacturing technology means that the industry is actively looking for new applications using more types of alloys.
 with lightweight titanium components ebikes become lighter more energy efficient and more durable. sandvik prints components for the bicycle manufacturer gsd global. photo gsd global.
 focus on niche products
 sandvik already has one of the widest alloy programmes optimized for additive manufacturing on the market and we see even greater potential for our unique product range in the future. as a result we are purposefully investing in continuously developing more materials that meet the industrys new needs for improved productivity profitability and sustainability. we focus mainly on niche products for demanding customers within aerospace medicine energy tool manufacturing and other industries.
 sandvik is a leading manufacturer of advanced stainless steels and special alloys in various shapes. the company is a global player with 40000 employees. in sandviken the company has a newly built stateoftheart facility where titanium powder for additive manufacturing is manufactured in a completely protected atmosphere to ensure as pure a powder as possible. customers can order and receive premium osprey titanium powder that is perfectly tailored to fit their specific application and needs  down to the size and characteristics of every last grain. titanium powder can be delivered in sizes down to one thousandth of a millimeter.
 the market for titanium powder for additive manufacturing is large because it is a costeffective way of manufacturing products from this exclusive metal says peter.
 at sandvik we have for example developed a new milling tool in titanium that is 80 lighter compared to the original tool  and up to 200 more productive for the endcustomer. we also print lightweight components for ebikes in titanium which makes the bikes lighter stronger and more durable  and thereby more energy efficient. these are two great examples of how additive manufacturing can add customer value and some true sustainability benefits.
 at sandvik for example they have 3d printed a new milling machine in titanium lightweight coromill 390 that is 80 per cent lighter compared to the original milling machine and up to 200 per cent more productive for the endcustomer. photo sandvik coromant ab
 in these projects we primarily contribute with our expertise as a powder manufacturer and materials expert. at the same time we are learning about process parameters and many other aspects of additive manufacturing. working with other industrial partners provides us with a valuable network. were also granted an even more detailed understanding of the enduser needs which allows us to keep pushing the boundaries to develop even better materials and products.
 societal benefits highlighted
 as an industrial partner we get the opportunity to show off what we do and this in turn can open up opportunities for additive manufacturing in more areas. we offer for example metal powder for areas as ranging from manufacturing medical implants and demanding applications within the aerospace industry to lightweight components for very artisan ebikes. so far i think that we have only seen a fraction of the smart sustainable products and technical solutions that additive manufacturing can contribute to.
 do you want to continue your studies after your masters degree? then you should consider to become a phdstudent. postgraduate education is equivalent to four years of fulltime studies 240 credits and ending with a phd. after two years 120 credits a licentiate degree can be obtained.
 at university west we offer doctoral and licentiate degrees in the following subject areas
 work integrated learning wil  since 1 january 2020 a new completely unique interdisciplinary postgraduate subject related to primarily the social sciences and humanities.
 read more about doctoral studies
 to studera.nu in english
 read more at about us  job opportunities
 our areas of strength
 knowledge and learning related to studies and working life.
 links to presentations and recordings below.
 recordings
 university west operates in a region with many industries that emit the most climateaffecting gases in sweden.
 the student should fulfil the requirements for acceptance to thirdcycle studies in production engineering or the equivalent.
 course syllabus is not published
 participants must be admitted to thirdcycle programme in work integrated and workplace learning or another relevant thirdcycle programme.
 car sharing contributes to an increased sustainability not only ecologically but also socially and economically. in metropolitan regions around europe car sharing is becoming more common. there are often several different services available in the same city but in many smaller cities the alternative is completely lacking.
 now the project sesma together with nevs and eidar trollhättans bostadsbolag is conducting a pilot study that involves letting about ten people from different households in granngården be part of a carpool. they will be able to share two electric cars parked in the area for just over one month.
 the purpose is to find out what the participants need the car for and what their habits of transport look like malin pongolini explains. we also want to understand how people experience letting go of what they own and instead share a car with others who live in the same area.
 important aspects of the sesma project are ecological economic and social sustainability. therefore the choice of residential area is extra relevant.
 we have already done a smaller similar study in another residential area here in trollhättan says malin and continues where the participants used an already existing carpool. the idea with this study in granngården is that we also want to examine areas with a different socioeconomic structure.
 eidar hopes to be able to offer car sharing to its tenants in the futureeidar plays an important part in the pilot study. among other things they have facilitated the contact between sesma and the residents and provided the study with one of the two electric cars. the second car is provided by nevs.
 at eidar sustainability is an important focus. they have an idea that their vehicles being used during the day by civil servants also could be used in the evenings and on weekends by their tenants.
 we have for a time been wanting to use our vehicles in a more efficient way than we have done so far explains owe lång cfo at eidar. yet we have not found the method for this yet so when sesma reached out about the pilot study it was an easy decision for us to make  we are more than happy to participate in the project.
 according to owe lång eidar wants to help the residents of trollhättan open their eyes to this type of mobility service with the goal of contributing to a more environmentally friendly city where car sharing is a natural element.
 nadia smit project manager at nevs says that the ambition is to have one mobility system throughout the whole country where the first pilot with selfdriving vehicles sango is planned to start in the next few years in stockholm. like malin pongolini nadia smit points out that most attempts at car sharing today are focused on larger cities.
 as of now we are working out different scenarios for how the business models can be adapted to make car sharing work in smaller cities nadia smit explains. it is very important to have input so that we can adapt our offer so that people choose car sharing instead of owning their own car nadia concludes.
 many bookings even before the study startedthe pilot study begun last week with a test week. the participants then had the opportunity to start using the carpool with extra support from the projects three partners.
 during the test week we wanted to help the participants get over all the thresholds malin pongolini explains. there has already been a very high number of bookings during the test week but it is not until now this week that we start measuring and collecting data she concludes.
 the pilot study ends in late october with interviews with the participants
 active
 completed
 the project takes a comprehensive approach on sustainability to provide a pathway that could contribute to the climate target through development of advanced thermal spray ts coatings for application in diverse sectors.
 the development of the advanced masters program in production technology with specialisation in welding technology mweld project aims to develop a 2year masters programme covering a wide range of topics such as welding technologyrelated areas weldingbased am materials sciences quality assurance is planned to start in autumn 2023.
 the recruitment of an adjunct lecturer is part of the core area iindustrial work integrated learning iail and has a particular focus on industrial transformation and leadership in manufacturing organizations where artificial intelligence ai is developed and applied.
 the aim of the project is to produce improved capacity for norm awareness and norm critical education in hies health care programs and by doing so provide better quality of care in europe.
 clouds develop an ai based sustainable production system which  is capable of handling the process planning virtual commissioning optimizing the production schedule addressing the bottleneck issues in mixed model assembly and balancing the production line with human workload.
 directed energy deposition for industrial competitiveness in additive manufacturing technologies.
 the overall scope of the project is to determine the threshold for when internal am defects affect the fatigue performance using conventional ndt equipment like computed tomography ultrasonic and liquid penetrant as well as data from inprocess control.
 the project seeks to enhance material processing techniques contributing to the aerospace industrys efficiency sustainability and competitiveness.
 the project aims to explore the individual biographical experiences of female immigrant students in higher education and the often critical turning points on womens paths to graduation.
 the focus of this study is a collaborative project between the police and social services that goes by the name rätt kurva. the objective of rätt kurva is to prevent children from becoming involved in socalled gang crime.
 swedish health care is facing several challenges and increase in healthcare costs combined with limited resources. we need a transformation to sustainable healthcare that is closer to the citizens comprehensive care.
 the project aims at performing an indepth and systematic needs analysis of the error recovery process and knowledge integration demands between involved human stakeholders at the partner companies and based on that design a prototype for an aiarbased error recovery support system for operators.
 smart  surface tension of metals above vaporization temperature
 the purpose of the project is to explain the physical effects that influence the surface tension of evaporating surfaces. a combination of theoretical modeling and experiments is proposed.
 the project aims to enhance companies ability to commercialize new knowledge through workshops seminars and focus groups.
 strof  lightweight structures for open fan motor demonstrator
 the purpose of the project is to strengthen the competitiveness of gkn aerospace in trollhättan with smf partners by participating in an international demonstrator engine with leading oems.
 team  language learning and multilingualism in a transdisciplinary perspective
 the purpose of team is to apply a transdiciplinary approach to study the complex interaction between linguistic cognitive neurological and social prerequisites that underpin language acquisition and multilingualism at the level of the individual and of social interaction.
 the development of object shift in north germanic child language
 trollhättans restart strategy  from strategies to implementation of collaboration and living city center with digital innovation
 the overall aim of the project is to identify the challenges that the city of trollhättan is facing as they launch a restart strategy for the city centre as well as lead change and initiate collaboration with the private business community.
 the project aims to shed light on the shortterm and longterm processes between young peoples computer games and mental illness as well as to increase understanding of the central mechanisms that may play a role in these connections
 work trainee
 the project will increase the students connection to working life during education by transforming existing courses to be fully or partially performed at the company.
 industry can design higher performance products. manufacturing can be made more efficient faster and more flexible. it also requires significantly less material in manufacturing reducing the extraction of natural resources. in addition components and machine parts can be repaired and renovated greatly reducing consumption of resources.
 a mature technology used in aircraft engine components
 developing automated robust processes
 the industrial partners represent different parts of the production chain  from suppliers of materials and equipment to end manufacturers  which is a major asset. in the final stages of the project the am processes are to be tested in two different demonstrators.
 technology and learning are combined in a unique way.
 three areas of focus production processes production systems and industrial workintegrated learning wil.
 for more information joel andersson professor of materials science university of west
 many women who were exposed to severe abuse or neglect in childhood nonetheless manage to feel a sense of wellbeing in adulthood. how can this be?
 since girls and women are overrepresented as victims of intrafamilial violence its important to understand resilience in adult women. thats why we chose to study women specifically in this study gunnarsdóttir says.
 the study comprised interviews with 22 women in sweden who had experienced abuse or neglect in childhood. the results showed that they described the sense of living not only surviving as adults despite being severely abused as children as something dynamic a constantly ongoing process. it consisted the women said of an internal process that was closely intertwined with their overall life situation and social relationships and contained four dimensions. these were first establishing and maintaining control of their own lives second using their personal resources third surrounding themselves with people who were valuable to them and fourth reaching acceptance.
 lifes strategic choices
 examples of the dimension concerning control in the womens lives are their strategic choices in terms of getting an education building a family and selecting activities that created meaning for them. it also emerged clearly that they actively worked through what had happened to them. they did so through various dialogues  with professionals for example or people important to them andor within themselves. they also actively set boundaries opting out of what drained their energy and choosing what gave them energy.
 sources of support in society
 using ones inner resources can mean embracing joy in life and engaging in activities that bring joy releasing ones inner strength and assigning responsibility for past events.
 we believe the results can contribute with an understanding that a variety of options societal support is needed to support young women with experience similar to the women in the study so that they can get help in creating for themselves a future in which they not only survive but can also feel fine gunnarsdóttir says.
 being resilient is not simply something you are just like that. resilience is created and released in an interplay between our internal resources and external circumstances. what society can do is ensure that these circumstances enable women to build up and benefit from their own inner resources gunnarsdóttir says.
 to the article
 theme track dsr for a resilient world
 cochairs monica chiarini tremblay matthew mullarkey stefan morana
 the general track will focus on all relevant topics including dsr for organizational and societal problems especially solutions for complex and wicked problems. we welcome empirical conceptual and design contributions.
 dsr methods and education
 the dsr methods and education track will focus on rigorous and relevant methods to produce dsr and best practices in teaching and learning. submissions on what and how to teach dsr and methodological innovations such as philosophy processes tools and techniques to produce impactful dsr are encouraged. furthermore we welcome papers that seek to apply or extend dsr methods beyond the scope of the information systems discipline e.g. in entrepreneurship or other fields. we seek conceptual and empirical studies that advance understanding and improve dsr methods and education including studies that apply dsr in an educational context.
 emerging topics in dsr
 the emerging topics track is open to new ideas for expanding dsr. for example new domains for dsr inquiry e.g. transdisciplinary perspectives tourism education new technologies e.g. ai data mesh and new ways of thinking about the role of dsr and its impact on organizations and society.
 two areas of strength
 work integrated learning wil and production technology is the universitys two areas of strength. these are deepened and developed from 2023 to two complete academic environments.
 technology and learning in an exciting combination
 phd students in collaboration with others
 visiting professorsaffiliated
 please do not hesitate to contact us
 eight industrial companies are participating
 an important aspect of the project is that it is carried out in close collaboration with industrial companies from various sectors. the participating companies are anva ksg gkn aerospace inwoco mimsafe saab group surveillance saab group aeronautics ultramare and volvo buses.
 during the spring we visited most of the companies to identify their challenges what automation and smart solutions they are currently working with and what their future plans look like. in the ongoing project phase we are jointly creating various cases that we will delve into. for example implementing smart automation for worktasks that are currently performed manually says kristina eriksson.
 the goal is to build two industrial sizes demonstrators at university west automation lab in the projects final phase where smart automated process solutions can be showcased.
 to achieve smart automation with humans at the center entirely new methods are needed to describe a robots tasks says fredrik danielsson professor of automation at university west. we must abandon current practices of fixed programmed behaviors and instead introduce solutions where the robot is more flexible and can make its own decisions with the help of ai.
 we have some challenges with the products often being produced at too low a pace to justify their own automation solution. it often results in quite complicated solutions explains peranders björk chief industrialization engineer at saab group aeronautics.
 we chose to participate in this project for several reasons. we want to be able to justify and implement automation more easily and also get help justifying purely collaborative work tasks. we hope to create a more flexible automation solution that adapts to the current situation such as in case of material shortages or other disruptions. we also hope to gain a better understanding of how we can specify equipment requirements in upcoming projects says peranders björk.
 theodorsson annikathorsen ceciliatryggvason ninavvarga anita ykajsa yang hansen
 reservation of books not available
 reservation of books not available during the evening of november 20
 reservation or renewal not available tonight 253
 resources and inspiration
 here you can find links to resources to learn more and get inspiration on how to use the tools available to use in openlab.
 thingiverse
 thingiverse is a design community that shares information och inspiration on how to create and print 3dobject with the help of a 3dprinter.
 read more about one of the 3dprinter models that are available in openlab.
 read more about the smithsonian institutes work to make their collection of artifacts available as 3dmodels.
 unreal engine is a game engine developed by epic games that can be used to create 3d enviorments and applications. unreal engine is used by the university in the courses about immersive media.
 learn more about how to use unreal engine.
 teach with fornite creative in your classroom
 unreal engine has a course where you can learn how to use fortnite creative to teach students differents subjects.
 unity
 just as unreal engine unity is a game engine that is to create 3d enviorments and applications. this game engine is not used by the university in its courses but can still be of use if you are interested in learning to develop for vrar.
 software that can be used for photogrammetry.
 3df zephyr online courses
 online courses to learn how to use 3df zephyr.
 read more about valve index one of the vrheadset that are available in openlab.
 read more about htc vive vrheadset one of the vrheadset that are available in openlab.
 our supplier telenor has to restart a server and put in more memory. may cause disturbances in our telephony between 15101540 today thursday june 20.
 information about restaurant and café at university west in trollhättan.
 lunch restaurant that serves meat fish vegetarian pasta soup sandwiches and coffee. buffet breakfast is served on fridays. you will find the restaurant in the main building adjacent to the main entrances of the fhouse.
 lunch is served 1115  1330
 student cafe with todays lunch salads pie coffee freshly squeezed juice smoothies barista coffee  brew sandwiches grilled sandwich etc. you will find the café in the cbuilding after the entrance under the glass bridge.
 ordinary opening hours
 every day about 0700  1500
 if you have your own food there is a canteen with microwave ovens and refrigerators in any of our five studentpentryn. you can read more about this on our side of the premises on the campus.
 resuming of studies
 fill out this form if you are in one the following situations
 have been unqualified for further studies in the programme and now qualified again the results must be reported in ladok.
 have approved leave from studies with or without guaranteed admission.
 have unfinished coursecourses without future course instances within programme.
 registration can only be offered subject to availability.
 for the resuming of studies in a freestanding course apply for  university west  access to a course in canvas hv.se  or reregistration.
 when applied you will receive further instructions in a confirmation email.
 for resuming of studies in the nursing programme next semester apply at the latest by october 15 for spring semester or by march 15 for autumn semester.
 resuming for studies
 form for resuming of studies
 give reasons for resumption of studies
 approved leave from studies guaranteed admission
 been unqualified for further studies in the programme and now qualified again
 approved leave from studies with guaranteed admission
 unfinished coursecourses without furture course instances within programme
 other reasons please give reasons in the field below
 specify which programme year and course you wish to resume studies for
 retriever business database is now available off campus again
 retriever business database
 desrist reviews are a critical and essential input for acceptancerejection decisions. the track and program chairs value each reviewers input as a significant resource that impacts the quality of the conference. reviews also substantially influence the work of others and can have a positive impact on publications.
 desrist follows a doubleblind review process. authors must anonymize their submissions. if you have a conflict regarding the doubleblind process please communicate with the track chairs immediately or if in doubt the program chairs. all review participants should keep submissions reviewers and the review process are confidential.
 please keep the following in mind as you review a paper
 what is the contribution of the paper? are the ideas novel? is the contribution substantial enough to recommend acceptance?
 is the paper methodologically and theoretically if applicable strong?
 will the paper generate interesting discussion?
 does the paper have potential to be developed further? e.g. into additional work journal submission etc.
 does the paper fit desrist andor the submitted track? as you know desrist is different from most other conferences given our focus on design and the development of systems.
 as a guideline a good review is typically about a page long and includes the following
 if relevant a sentence or two about your expertise especially if you are knowledgeable about some aspects of the paper and less knowledgeable about others
 a short two to three sentence summaries of what you think are the highlights of the paper
 a list of concerns that are typically listed in order of importance
 the main reason you chose to accept or reject the paper
 reference if applicable
 rfmmt  robust five axis machining with modern tools
 fiveaxis machining is necessary to produce precise and high quality free form surfaces for metallic products such as gas turbine impellers. manufacturing processes before machining such as casting or forging in addition to the recently developed metal additive manufacturing processes often leave surfaces with poor finish undesirable metallurgical structure and inaccurate geometry. in particular the surface finish is often poor with various additive manufacturing methods particularly in the wall directions compared to the surface generated at the build direction. with few alloys it is possible to improve the surface finish by chemical machining approaches but in many other alloys a finish milling operation is often necessary to remove the rough and sometimes defective sublayer and possible build support features. majority of am manufactured components are already topologically optimized and they are manufactured near net shape and may offer limited stiffness compared to those machined from solid billets or forged pieces. furthermore while in past the finishing was dominated by ballend milling operations recently complex cutting edge geometries are developed that provide better surface finish by cutting along a longer curved cutting edge compared to ballend milling.an example is a design which is often referred to as barrelend mill which with a large engagement length can produce a better surface finish compared to a ballend mill that machines the surface in more passes. on the other hand the large engagement with the workpiece can lead to regenerative vibrations known as chatter between the tool and the workpiece. since the finish milling can often be accomplished by a wide selectioncombination of overlap depth of cut tilt and lead angles it is deemed valuable to study and develop guidelines and algorithms both in cases where vibrations originate from the flexibility of the workpiece and also in cases where the instability is originated from the flexibility of the spindletool combination. modern tools can also have unequal spacing between their teeth andor variable helix angles to improve their stability. correspondingly they need more sophisticated algorithms in modelling. this project will use tools and methods that are developed during previous projects at university west such as machine tool encoder signal processing system in processing its experiments and cnc data streaming capabilities along with inprocess spindle dynamics identification methods to predict and optimize various parameters that could be selected for five axis finishmachining where dynamic flexibility of the tool or the workpiece can cause unstable vibrations. the coproduced results will be packaged as userfriendly calculation tools and educational courses to be offered to a wider number of employees within the participating companies. the proposed project includes work packages for geometrical modelling stability modelling inprocess identification along with verification and industrial case studies. the project will also be executed in collaboration with industrial work integrated group from ptw.
 itchef
 easyreader
 risk for a short internet disruption this afternoon
 due to network maintenance there is a small risk of a short interruption to our internet service this afternoon.
 rms  robotised laser metalwire deposition
 rms was a vinnova mera programme project 200600100 robotstyrd metallbyggnad via smältning coordinated by volvo aero. university west was involved in process development offline programming automation and validation.
 in the rmsprocess metal is deposited layer by layer at desired positions by melting a metal wire using a robotized fibre laser welding equipment. the process consists of the following steps
 1. caddrawing which defines the desired metal buildup
 2. computation of component slices of the same thickness as one layer
 3. preparation of the robot paths and process parameters
 4. check access by robot offline programming
 5. build up the component using sensors and feedback control
 6. the resulting component
 the project objective was to automate the entire process from caddrawing to validated component.started as a prestudy in 2005.ended 2009 march 31.
 published resultsheralic a. a.k. christiansson et al. 2007. automation of robotized laser metalwire deposition. iasted international conference on control and applications montreal canada.
 heralic a. a.k. christiansson et al. 2007. freeform fabrication using laser metalwire deposition. swedish production symposium. gothenburgh sweden
 heralic a. ottosson m. et al. 2008. automation of a robotised metal deposition system using laser melting of wire. 2008. in 18th international conference on flexible automation and
 intelligent manufacturing faim2008 university of skövde sweden.
 heralic a. a.k. christiansson et al. 2008. control design for automation of robotized
 laser metalwire deposition. in 17th ifac congress seoul korea.
 heralic a. ottosson m. et al. 2008. visual feedback for operator interaction in surface modification by means of robotised laser metal deposition. in 22nd international
 conference on surface modification technologies smt22 trollhättan sweden.
 almir heralic phdstudent
 robert andersson started his education at uppsala university in 1988 and started teaching computer communication in 2001 after several working years in the business including work with cisco equipment. his first instructorclass was in 2003 and has since then taught several hundreds of students the ccnacurricula. he is since 2008 a ccnp instructor as well. robert was also one of the founders of a twoyear university program in network technology ccnaccnp and itsecurity. in 2007 he won the education recognition award from cisco in competition with other instructors within the european market. again in 2013 he won the ccnp instructor recognition award.
 microstructure and mechanical properties of ti6al4v welds produced with different processes.
 influence of laser powder bed fusion scanning pattern on residual stress and microstructure of alloy 718
 jan čapek e. polatidis n. casati robert pederson c. lyphout m. strobl
 on the microstructure of laser beam powder bed fusion alloy 718 and its influence on the low cycle fatigue behaviour
 effect of silicon on creep properties of titanium 6al2sn4zr2mo alloy
 anisotropic fatigue properties of alloy 718 manufactured by electron beam powder bed fusion
 arun ramanathan balachandramurthi johan moverare thomas hansson robert pederson
 review of laser powder bed fusion of gammaprimestrengthened nickelbased superalloys
 finite element modeling and validation of springback and stress relaxation in the thermomechanical forming of thin ti6al4v sheets
 additive manufacturing of alloy 718 via electron beam melting  effect of posttreatment on the microstructure and the mechanical properties.
 influence of defects and asbuilt surface roughness on fatigue properties of additively manufactured alloy 718
 arun ramanathan balachandramurthi johan moverare nikhil dixit robert pederson
 microstructure and porosity of laser welds in cast ti6al4v with addition of boron
 oxidation behavior of ti6al4v alloy exposed to isothermal and cyclic thermal treatments
 simulation of additive manufacturing using coupled constitutive and microstructure models
 the hierarchy of microstructure parameters affecting the tensile ductility in centrifugally cast and forged ti834 alloy during high temperature exposure in air
 applications of additive manufacturing  selected case studies and future prospects
 jerry isoaho christo dordlofva andreas segerstark peter harlin robert pederson
 the effect of γ and δ phase precipitation on the mechanical properties of inconel 718 manufactured by selective laser melting  an in situ neutron diffraction and acoustic emission study
 jan čapek efthymois polatidis michal knapek christophe lyphout nicola casati robert pederson markus strobl
 machinability of cast titanium alloy ti6al4v with addition of boron
 influence of laser powder bed fusion process parameters on voids cracks and microhardness of nickelbased superalloy alloy 247lc
 wirebased additive manufacturing of ti6al4v using electron beam technique
 florian pixner fernando warchomicka patrick peter axel steuwer magnus hörnqvist colliander robert pederson norbert enzinger
 laser beam powder bed fusion and post processing of alloy 247lc
 microstructure tailoring in electron beam powder bed fusion additive manufacturing and its potential consequences
 microstructural influence on fatigue crack propagation during high cycle fatigue testing of additively manufactured alloy 718
 influence of cyclic thermal treatments on the oxidation behavior of ti6al2sn4zr2mo alloy
 chemical milling of cast ti6al4v and ti6al2sn4zr2mo alloys in hydrofluoricnitric acid solutions
 electron backscatter diffraction characterization of fatigue crack growth in laser metal wire deposited ti6al4v
 temperature and microstructure evolution in gas tungsten arc welding wire feed additive manufacturing of ti6al4v
 husqvarna is one of the companies participating in restart. some of the participants at the companys production facility in brastad are from left sandra mattsson jörgen jensson and alexandra hallqvist lehtinen.
 in automated production processes unplanned stops occur due to tool failure material defects unmanaged program situations or human interventions etc. restart of production defined as an error recovery process is a complex problem involving the three phases error detection error diagnoses and resetting the system to a restartable state. short long and unplanned production stops are expensive unavoidable and cannot be predicted and therefore cannot be handled in advance in system and process models. there is no onesizefitsall solution rather each situation must be handled by the operator or maintenance personnel.
 the envisioned system prototype is expected to facilitate in particular the error diagnosis aspect of the recovery process through handson ar guidance tuned to the specific situation and skill level of the operator. the guidance will be based on error cause diagnosis strategies prerecorded by expert maintenance personnel strategies which the system automatically links to the current unexpected shop floor situation through ai. for recording and representing these strategies various technologies will be investigated including stateofthe art ai activity sequencing approaches eye tracking and arbased subtle guidance approaches.
 this course is a key course which allows the student to access our robotics lab in future courses. the course consists of a mixture between seminars and practical laboratory works with the industrial robots in our lab. main focus areas in the course are online programming safety and handling of the robot.
 completed course requirements of 120 credits including 90 credits in electrical engineering computer engineering or mechanical engineering or equivalent.
 restart i  robot error stop agent recovery tool
 this course is focusing on the kinematic modelling of multiple degrees of freedom manipulator robots. the course starts with building the foundation in robot kinematics by focusing on the forward kinematic problem which is to calculate based on all robot joints where the tooltip is located. further on in the course the focus changes to calculate the inverse kinematics problem i.e. to define how the joints should change so the robot can reach a specified point. the course consists of matlab exercises to model and simulate robot manipulators.
 minimum 120 he credits from a bachelor program including 90 he credits in electrical computer science or mechanical engineering or similar including idf200 integrals and differential equations 4.5 he credits or similar courses.
 the main focus in this course is to learn how to simulate a robot cell within a computer. the course consists of a mixture between seminars and practical labs both in a computer lab but also in our advanced robot lab. the course starts in the fundamentals in how to model a robot cell. later on in the course robot programs are uploaded and downloaded to the physical robot cell. the course ends with how the robot simulation tools are set up to be a digital twin of the robot cell.
 minimum 120 he credits from a bachelor program including 90 he credits in electrical computer science or mechanical engineering or similar fields and rbk600 robot certificate 15 he credits
 robotic systems parttime campus rbs720
 this course teaches the fundamentals in the robot theory as well as technical basics within machine vision. two advanced robot lab exercises building on the knowledge gained in the robot certificate course are done in our robotics lab. two other lab exercises are done to get a better understanding of the machine vision applications.
 minimum 120 he credits from a bachelor program including 90 he credits in electrical computer science or mechanical engineering or similar fields and rbk600 robot certificate 15 he credits.
 robotics and automation distance students at university west
 during 3 days a group of masters students in robotics and automation are at university west to do practical laboratory work. after examination they will receive a robot driving license that might open doors and get the students better suited for the future.
 the 3day laboration takes place at ptc  university wests tech lab in innovatum district in trollhättan. on scene the atmosphere is informal in a way but also very realistic. from the outside it is hard to guess what is hiding but inside the workshop you get the feeling of suddenly entering an industrial company. a group of students from various countries is here as a part of their masters programs.
 this course is about robot programming and later on there will also be a second with a focus on plc systems. many of the students are already very well educated and some work as it consultants technical engineers or mechanical engineers. tuomas pönni is originally from finland and is one of the visiting students. he finds the application process in sweden very easy and likes that you can study on distance.
 i work as an it consultant and live in stockholm. society gets more and more automated and a robot drivers license is a way to secure the future. distance learning is also perfect for me since i dont have to move says tuomas pönni.
 the students are currently working on programming and calibrating. at the end of each robot there is a pencil attached and it is their job to calculate and calibrate until they get the pen to draw a desired figure on the paper. the level of concentration is high and there is also a very optimistic mood in the group. anders appelgren the headteacher says that though it is after lunch on the first day many students have already completed 2 of 4 mandatory parts of the course.
 divyaraj gadhavi and rushik patel are masters students from india and now work as test engineers and mechanical engineers. they are both very optimistic about the future and have high dreams. rushik would like to work in the automotive industry while divyaraj is more interested in the aerospace industry or space and rocket science to be more precise.
 i think knowledge in robotics will give med better possibilities in the future thats why i choose this course says divyaraj gadhavi.
 they like sweden a lot except maybe for the cold winters. people are really nice and welcoming here divyaraj continues. both divyaraj and rushik are learning swedish through an sfi course and they seem very convinced of the benefits. learning swedish makes it 10 times easier to get a job in sweden even if you have finished higher education and the common working language is english.
 robotics and automation parttime campus roa200
 the course gives knowledge of the construction and function of modern automation systems including programmable logic control systems plc industrial robots communication buses vision systems and hmi. the course also provides knowledge about safety in and around an industrial automation system. practical laborations in the course are programming of industrial robots and plc in an industrial automation system
 sst200sensor technology or the equivalent.
 robust inprocess joint finding  robin
 the project aims to contribute to the goal of flexible manufacturing processes through demonstration of innovative laser welding solutions.
 the manufacturers gkn siemens and brogrens share the strong need to increase robustness in their production and the project outcome is expected to considerably reduce time in the workshop and increase the welding quality that will facilitate introduction of new products. the approach to reach the objectives of the project is by innovative sensor system development integration and thorough experimental validation.
 gästprofessor vid asian institute of technology ait thailand 20102021
 gästprofessor vid panyapiwat institute of management pim thailand 2019
 gästprofessor vid rangsit university thailand 20212023
 styrelsemedlem i thaiswedish chamber of commerce thailand 2015
 20212024  fellow with business placement to virtual manufacturing sweden. kkproject 2 million. project leader and have written entire application.
 20212025  phd application for a vinnova founding together with ltu for founding of two phd student. i am also currently supervising one phd students at ltu 4 million. main project leader at vm.
 20202023   scarce iiproject  sensible value chain through digitalised planning material handling and circular economy. collaborationnetworking granted from vinnova and production 2030. project member for the project for virtual manufacturing 15 million sek. project members are chalmers university of technology tme chalmers university of technology ims royal institute of technology parker hannifin ab bror tonsjö ab siemens afry eqpack virtualmanufacturing qbim ab rise 87 million sek. project leader for virtual manufacturing ab sweden. partly involved in the project application.
 20172021   the k3project insa internationalisering av samverkan develop strategies methods and processes for international collaborationnetworking granted from vinnova project leader for the entire project. project members are kth his liu mau miun oru hig and ju 8 million sek entire project leader and have written application.
 20212022  kkfounding recruitment hög 19 project leader for international guest professor marcio lopes pimenta supply chain and operation management scom 202103202203 founding 1 million sek project leader and have written application.
 20162022  international campus jthic project over 300 students have study and done internshipthesis work in parallel one semester abroad in thailand vietnam brazil mexico south africa and usa. project leader 5 million sek.
 20152017 prodhög  competitive manufacturing in a highcost environment with a grant from regionförbundet småland sweden. project member 4 million sek. project member and have partly written application.
 20142017  managing and working in the project produktionslyftet with a grant from vinnova and kk project member my part 1 million sek.
 20042005  training companies in management issues for sustainable environment and resilience with a grant from västra götalandsregionen 1 million sek. project leader and have written the application
 20092014  the resilience project at university of borås with a grant from the university of borås project member 1 million sek.
 20062010  nit on demand project university of borås with a grant from vinnova project member 3 million sek.
 quality and logistics management supply and demand chain management lean production six sigma resilience risk management operation and production management.
 book chapters14 andersson r. using a lean six sigma strategy to be resilient in the telecommunications sector examples from ericsson ab the international handbook of lean organization with cambridge university press chap 10 2021. this book granted as best lean book in the world 2022.15 andersson r. resilience in the productdelivery supply chain  the resilience framework pp. 133146 springer singapore 2018.16 bridi e. schmitt j. andersson r. andrade d. f. paladini e. p. book chapter. key challenges and opportunities for quality sustainability and innovation in the fourth industrial revolution. organizers su mi dahlgaardpark  jens j. dahlgaard. world scientific 2020.17   andersson r. organisatorisk resilience resilience i försörjningskedjan kap 14 studentlitteratur lund sweden 2014.
 doctoral thesisanderssson r supply chain resilience through quality management thesis for the degree for doctor of philosophie report 2985 division of logistics and transportation department of technology management and economics chalmers university of technology  göteborg 2009
 rules and guidelines for 3rdcycle level
 table of contents
 rules for establishing a subject for programmes at the 3rdcycle level
 rules for the phasing out of a programme at the 3rdcycle level
 rules för the individual study plan at the 3rdcycle  programme
 rules for departmental positions within the framework of doctoral studentship at university west
 rules for courses on programmes at the 3rdcycle level
 rules for supervision in courses at the 3rdcycle level
 rules for the planning seminar midway review and the final review in programmes at the 3rdcycle level
 rules for the licentiate essay and the licentiate seminar
 rules for dissertations and the public defence
 1       introduction
 the purpose of these rules is to facilitate and support those actors whose job it is to write applications for establishing a subject area at the 3rdcycle level. these rules contribute to ensuring that we maintain the high quality of programmes at the 3rdcycle level.
 these rules deal with subjects within the framework of the authorisation university west hv has from the swedish higher education authority to issue general qualifications at the 3rdcycle level.  university west is authorised to issue two degrees at the 3rdcycle level one is in the field of workintegrated learning and the other is in the field of production technology.
 this authorisation means that the university has the right to develop and phase out 3rdcycle programmes accept students who apply to 3rdcycle programmes establish general and individual study plans confer general qualifications for doctoral and licentiate degrees etc.  an institution of higher education does not need to submit a new application to the swedish higher education authority if the structure or content of the 3rdcycle programme is changed see
 2       establishing a subject area
 new 3rdcyclelevel subject areas can be established within the framework of the field for which university west has authorisation to confer degrees in workintegrated learning and production technology.
 the case is then processed and presented to the vice chancellor by the responsible administrator.
 2.2      basis for decisions
 the application must contain the following
 title of subject offered on a 3rdcycle programme
 indicate in both swedish and english the title of the subject offered on the 3rdcycle programme.
 description of the 3rdcycle subject
 describe the need for establishing a new 3rdcycle subject and how this subject relates to relevant 3rdcycle subjects offered nationally and internationally.
 describe and analyse the 3rdcycle subjects longevity.
 describe and argue for the 3rdcycle subjects relevance in relation to uws visions goals and profile.
 collaboration resources and other requirements
 describe the 3rdcycle subjects national and international networks and collaborations within and outside the academy.
 describe what is necessary for the recruiting of 3rdcycle students nationally and internationally.
 describe the human resources available including their titles availability and competence scientific professional and pedagogical in relation to what is planned for the 3rdcycle subject as part of a programme. account for any need to hire more personnel.
 estimate what will be needed for the programme in terms of funding and the number of 3rdcycle students planned for each year.
 describe access to adequate resources at or outside uw and infrastructure that is needed for the programme. account for any investments that will be necessary.
 describe possible forms of collaboration with several actors within andor outside uw whose intention it is to collaborate on the programme being planned.
 describe any other possible needs.
 attach a proposal for a general study plan to the application.
 the purpose of these rules is to facilitate and support those actors whose task it is to write applications for the phasing out of a subject area at the 3rdcycle level. these rules contribute to ensuring that we maintain high quality programmes at the 3rdcycle level.
 these rules deal with subjects within the framework of university wests authorisation from the swedish higher education authority to issue general qualifications at the 3rdcycle level.  university west is authorised to issue two degrees at the 3rdcycle level one is in the field of workintegrated learning and the other is in the field of production technology.
 2       phasing out a subject area
 the case involving phasing out a subject is processed and presented to the vice chancellor by the responsible administrator.
 the reason for phasing out the subject. this can be for example changes to the universitys strategic focus substantial shortcomings in educational quality or that the subject has been replaced by a new subject.
 an inquiry regarding the consequences for 3rdcycle students who have been accepted and for the entire academic environment.
 suggestions for transitional rules regarding accepted 3rdcycle students to whom the possibility of completing the programme should be provided if at all possible.
 rules för the general syllabus at the 3rdcycle programme
 the individual study plan must contain information about
 degree of activity
 the focus of the thesis planned and carried out scientific elements
 planned and completed courses
 documentation and fulfilment of the national learning outcomes.
 in consultation with the assistant supervisor the thirdcycle student and the head of department the principal supervisor is responsible for ensuring that the individual study plan is drawn up and submitted for approval.
 the individual study plan is approved by the respective subject council for doctoral education no later than 60 days after the thirdcycle student has begun hisher studies.
 followup
 if the principal supervisor has not yet been appointed or is about to be replaced the head of department in consultation with the scientific council must appoint another suitable person e.g. assistant supervisor or intended principal supervisor to prepare the individual study plan together with the thirdcycle student.
 in consultation with the relevant manager the principal supervisor and doctoral students must annually document the planning and followup of any departmental duties in the individual study plan. for thirdparty doctoral students the same is done in consultation with the relevant manager at an external employer. supervisors must always be informed about additional teaching or other duties.
 every student who has been admitted to a thirdcycle programme at uw has an approved individual study plan isp within 60 days of starting the programme. this will be followed up continuously and revised during the planning dialogue between the principal supervisor and the thirdcycle student. it is submitted for renewed approval at least once a year.
 when more substantial changes are made to the plan of study such as a change of supervisor or if the student requests it a revised individual study plan is submitted for approval. approval of the isp is obtained from the subject council.2
 the individual study plan should contain information about a timeframe the supervisors employment degree of activity the focus of the thesis progress made and whether it meets the national learning outcomes and other concerns in accordance with the established template for isps. the principal supervisor together with the thirdcycle student are responsible for planning the students studies so that these learning outcomes are reached. it should be clear from the matrix for goal achievement attached to the isp how and through which parts of the education the national learning outcomes will be  reached for the licentiate degree  phd degree.
 if the principal supervisor has not yet been appointed or is in the process of being changed the department head in consultation with the subject council will appoint an appropriate person for ex. assistant supervisor or intended principal supervisor to process plan the individual study plan together with the thirdcycle student.
 normally a doctoral studentship is a departmental position that comprises no more than 20 percent of a fulltime post spread out over the entire studentship. see also the local collective bargaining agreement for doctoral students. the position is extended according to this same percentage.
 the following rules aim to clarify the terms and conditions for a departmental position based upon maintaining the quality of the 3rdcycle programme.
 to strengthen doctoral students teaching qualifications for a future academic career it may be pertinent to offer them the opportunity to do teaching within the framework of their departmental position.
 classroom experience must be adjusted to the doctoral students abilities and experience. according to the local collective bargaining agreement responsibility for an entire course course development and examination are as a rule not included in the students job description. teaching tasks can otherwise include the planning and teaching of various parts of a course such as lectures seminars and labs. the doctoral student can participate in the examination of a course but should not alone be responsible for and can never be the examiner of a course.
 the extent and content of a departmental position is planned and followed up on in consultation with the students principal supervisor and their immediate superior. this is documented in the individual study plan and must take place before the annual revision and approval of the students study plan.
 before teaching on a course a doctoral student must have completed or at least begun a course in higher education pedagogy.
 since 1 january 2021 higher education pedagogy has been a required course for doctoral students on 3rdcycle programmes. further studies can after approval from the department head be completed within the framework of their departmental position.
 doctoral students who began their studies before 2021 can transfer up to five he credits in higher education pedagogy as part of their elective courses at the 3rdcycle level. otherwise if approved this can be accomplished within the framework of their departmental position.
 courses on the programme
 a 3rdcycle programme includes elective and optional courses. the exact composition of courses is established by the individual study plan based on requirements in the general study plan and relevance specialization as well as the progression of work on the dissertation. the general rule for 3rdcycle programmes is that courses taken should be at the 3rdcycle level and that the obligatory courses that are included in the general study plan should be taken at university west.
 transferring course credits
 the transfer of credits in previously completed courses is allowed only if
 the course can be seen to correspond completely or partially to one of uws obligatory courses at the 3rdcycle level
 the course can be seen to be relevant in relation to the general study plan for programmes at the 3rdcycle level and the doctoral students dissertation.
 the subject board has developed a written practice with criteria as support for transferring credits in courses at the 3rdcycle level.
 for a doctoral student who has been accepted to begin studies on or before 31 december 2020 a qualifying course in higher education pedagogy can be transferred as an elective course worth at the most five he credits at the 2ndcycle level.
 establishing individual courses
 it is possible under the scheme of elective courses to develop an individual course as part of ones 3rdcycle programme. before an individual course is begun the syllabus must be submitted for approval by the subject board.
 examination of courses at the 3rdcycle level
 the universitys rules for examination apply to courses examined at the 3rdcycle level hv 2023302.
 the examiner on a 3rdcycle course must be a professor or a reader who has been appointed by the head of the department after review of the suggestions and recommendation of the subject board.
 the right to supervision
 every doctoral student should have two to three supervisors of whom one is the students principal supervisor. decisions regarding supervisors are taken by the subject board when the individual study plan is being established. the doctoral student has the right to change supervisors without giving a reason. a new supervisor is appointed within 60 days of the request to change supervisors.
 resources for the scope of supervision are calculated to encompass no less than ten percent of a post for advising a doctoral student doing fulltime studies divided among the supervisors. if the student is not engaged in fulltime studies the scope of supervision is normally reduced.
 the suspension of entitlement to supervision
 if the doctoral student neglects their commitments to the extent that they are not following their individual study plan the vice chancellor can after termination of their employment as a doctoral student suspend their right to supervision and to other resources that are part of the 3rdcycle programme the higher education ordinance chapter 6 sections 3031.  the doctoral student can make an application to the vice chancellor if wishing to reinstate their right to supervision and other resources.
 the student can appeal the decision to suspend their right to resources. this is done through the higher education appeals board öhn.
 the composition of the supervisory group
 the principal supervisor must be a reader or a professor and the assistant supervisor must at minimum have a phd degree or the equivalent foreign degree in the relevant subject area for that specific doctoral or licentiate thesis project. it is the supervisors collective scholarly competence that determines the composition of the supervisory group.  the doctoral students views should also be weighed into the decision to appoint a supervisor and an even gender distribution should be sought after in the supervisory group.
 supervisors must have completed a course in supervision or attained equivalent knowledge and skills in some other way. an assistant supervisor without this training can be appointed under the condition that they have completed a supervision course within two years of beginning to supervise the student.
 a supervisor can come from another university or organisation if they are connected to university west through an ad hoc employment or contract. the principal supervisor is normally an employee of uw.
 the supervisors responsibilities
 the principal supervisor is responsible for the scholarly content in the dissertation. in addition they are responsible for the following
 together with the assistant supervisor and the doctoral student planning the students doctoral studies in such a way as to ensure that the national qualitative targets are attained.
 ensuring that the assistant supervisor and the doctoral student are well informed of the national and local rules for pursuing 3rdcycle studies.
 continuously discussing and revising the individual study plan in consultation with the doctoral student.
 seeing to it that a planning seminar a midway review and a final review are prepared and carried out according to current rules.
 guiding and supporting the doctoral student with networkbuilding and conversations about their career.
 seeing to it that the public defence and the licentiate seminar are prepared and carried out according to current laws.
 followup conversation
 to ensure that the national qualitative targets are attained the principal supervisor must follow up continuously through conversations with the doctoral student. if there are large deviations from the norm in a students argumentation analysis of the reasons behind these discrepancies must be carried out and a plan for measures to be taken drawn up. discussions of the progress being made should always be carried out in conjunction with the annual revision of the individual study plan.
 announcing a planning seminar a midway review and a final review
 no more than twenty working days before the planning seminar the midway review and the final review which precede the licentiate seminar and the public defence relevant information must be given to the subject board. thereafter the seminar is announced at least fifteen working days before it takes place.
 the planning seminar
 once a planning seminar has taken place the date is recorded in the students individual study plan.
 the midway review
 after the seminar the discussant provides a written assessment that contains recommendations for the students continued dissertation work in a template drawn up by the subject board.
 if the doctoral student is going to be awarded a licentiate degree the midway seminar is replaced by a final review.
 the final review before a licentiate seminar
 the final review is held before the licentiate seminar when the thesis is ventilated in the form it will have when published monograph or compilation thesis including articles and an introductory chapter. this should be held at least two months before requesting to schedule a licentiate seminar.
 the seminar is run by the principal supervisor. the presentation and material are reviewed by a discussant who has been appointed by the principal supervisor. the discussant must be a reader or the equivalent or a professor in the relevant subject area. the doctoral student is responsible for providing a summary when the seminar is announced.
 after the seminar the discussant provides a written assessment in which they recommend appropriate measures to be taken before the licentiate seminar. this is done in a template that has been created by the subject board.
 the final review before the public defence
 the final review is held before the public defence. at this review the dissertation is ventilated in the form in which it is intended to be published monograph or compilation thesis including articles and an introductory chapter. this review should be held at least three months before requesting to schedule a public defence.
 the seminar is led by the principal supervisor. presentation and material are reviewed by a discussant who had been appointed by the principal supervisor. normally the discussant should be a reader or a professor in the relevant subject area and employed by another institution of higher learning. the doctoral student is responsible for providing a summary when the seminar is announced.
 after the seminar the discussant provides a written assessment containing recommendations for the doctoral students continuing work on the dissertation. this is done in a template that has been created by the subject board. the assessment contains recommendations for appropriate measures to be taken before the public defense.
 the dissertation
 a dissertation is defended orally at a public defence. the scope and language of the dissertation is specified in the individual study plan.
 a previously examined licentiate essay may make up part of the dissertation and is defended at the public defence. it should be made clear which parts of the dissertation were written independently by the student if there is more than one author.
 requesting to schedule a public defence
 the dissertation is reviewed and defended at a public defence which is scheduled during the academic year. in extenuating circumstances the defence may be scheduled no more than three weeks outside of the academic calendar.
 the request to schedule a public defence is submitted to the subject board by the principal supervisor at least two months before the planned defence date and in accordance with the subject boards established routines. it is up to the subject board to decide whether a public defence should be scheduled and if so in consultation with the principal supervisor they appoint someone to chair the defence a discussant and an examining committee.
 distributing and publishing
 the dissertation text must be sent to the discussant and the examining committee no more than 35 working days before the scheduled defence. the discussant and each member of the examining committee must immediately contact the doctoral student and the principal supervisor if they discover any anomaly in the text or have any doubts about it.
 a dissertation is made public when it is nailed to the nailing post at least fifteen days before the scheduled defence. at the same time a digital version of the nailed page is sent to university library for a digital nailing.
 information regarding the time and place for the public defence is posted together with the abstract a popular science summary with an accompanying press release. any other relevant information is also made public at this time.
 no changes can be made to the dissertation after the publicationnailing.
 the examining committee the discussant and the chairperson for the public defence
 the public defence is chaired by the chairperson. there must be a discussant at the defence. the discussant must be a professor or a reader. the grade awarded for a dissertation is decided by the examining committee who are appointed specifically for each public defence.
 the examining committee is composed of three members and a substitute. the members of the examining committee decide which of them will be the chairperson. members of the examining committee and the substitute must be either professors or readers. no more than two members of the examining committee one ordinary member and a substitute may be employees of university west. women and men must be equally represented unless there are extenuating circumstances and if so these reasons must be documented in an appendix to the decision.
 anyone whose relationship to the doctoral student or to the supervisor poses a conflict of interest may not be appointed to serve as the discussant or as a member of the examining committee. having participated in a scholarly collaboration or coauthored an article or a chapter in an anthology during the past five years is considered a conflict of interest.  collaboration and coproduction that took place more than five years ago are considered a conflict of interest if the collaboration has been close and that person is not considered appropriate as a reviewer discussant or examining committee member.
 the public defence the examining committees meeting and grading
 the chairperson opens the public defence which begins with a presentation of the discussant the doctoral student the members of the examining committee and the supervisor followed by an outline of the way the public defence is structured. the author of the thesis then has the opportunity to mention any printing errorscorrections or other details that need to be explained.
 after an introductory presentation of the dissertation the defence of the text goes forward and the discussant poses questions to the author about the content and conclusions drawn in the dissertation. thereafter the examining committee have the opportunity to pose questions about the dissertation to the author and finally the audience also has the opportunity to pose questions before the chairperson brings the defence to a close.
 after the public defence the examining committee meet to assess the dissertation and award it a grade of either pass or fail. the examining committee have a quorum when three members are present and the decision is taken by the majority. when deciding upon a grade the committee should consider content as well as the defence of the dissertation and whether these meet the demands of the scientific community. if any parts of the dissertation are the result of collaboration between the doctoral student and other persons only the parts of the dissertation that were written by the doctoral student are assessed and only the doctoral students contributions are graded.
 the discussant and the supervisor have the right to be present at the examining committees meeting and they can participate in the discussion unless the examining committee decides otherwise. the discussant and the supervisor do not however have the right to participate in the decision itself.
 after the public defence the examining committee reveal their assessment. the examining committee determines whether any reservations will be made known.
 the examining committees chairperson announces the results of the examination to the doctoral student and the audience.
 rules and regulations for it
 information is one of university wests most important assets.
 a security awareness among all users is required in order to protect the values represented by the information. in order to meet the security requirements you need to know what responsibility you have. read more about your responsibility in the contingent liability below.
 your login details should be handled safely. if you suspect that somebody else knows your password then you should immediately change it. go to the system my account to change your password. do not use your university west password in other contexts. remember that you are personally responsible for what happens during a login with your account.
 in some of our systems for example our microsoft services we use multifactor authentication mfa when logging in. you therefore need to activate mfa. read about mfa and how to activate it here
 sunet means swedish university computer network.
 sunet rules and regulations in swedish
 more rules and regulations
 user agreement my account
 user agreement and acceptable use policy for it resources at university west
 itresources must not be used for purposes that break swedish law sunets rules or the rules of the university. the rules of the university are published at hv.se. the sunet rules can be found at sunet.se.
 an authorized user is anyone who has been given a user account by the university. the user account is accessed with a username and a password or some other authentication method. the user account is connected to one or more storage areas and gives access to several it systems.
 the following rules apply to the use of the universitys it resources
 you agree to be bound by user agreement and acceptable use policy and agree to comply with the regulations contained herein.
 if you do not agree to be bound by these rules you must contact your system administrator to cancel the user account.your personal details will be used in the universitys administrative systems. your name email address and information related to your employment may be displayed on the universitys website.
 you undertake to keep yourself informed of any changes in the user agreement and any supplementary regulations.
 you are not allowed to share your login credentials with anyone else. you are not allowed to use the credentials from the university in other services on the internet.
 the universitys itresources are monitored for misuse.
 consequences of misuse
 violation of these rules may result in the user being denied use of the universitys it resources. decisions about denial of access or referral of the matter to the vicechancellor for further action is taken by the head of the it department in consultation with any other concerned parties.
 if a breach of swedish legislation is suspected it will be reported to the police.
 rules for using computers
 the following rules apply to it activities at university west
 the computer rooms can only be booked by the scheduling staff.
 if a room is scheduled for teaching that room is reserved for students attending these classes. the teacher may give permission to other students to use free computers.
 food or drinks in any form are not permitted in computer rooms.
 do not use a screensaver to block a computer for more than 15 minutes. if you need to leave for a longer time save your work and logout.
 personal files and data must be stored on the storage area allocated to you on the network or on a personal storage media. data stored on local disk can be deleted at any time.
 attempts to conceal the users identity are prohibited if anonymity is not explicitly permitted.
 the authorized user must follow the instructions of the system administrator.
 you are not allowed to install software on computers with open access without permission from the service  it department. requests for permission should be sent to servicecenter.
 you are not allowed to change the basic configuration hvpc of the computer without permission from the service  it department.
 software licensed to university west or to staff at university west may only be used according to the licence agreement.
 copyrightprotected material may be copied or distributed only after receiving authorisation.
 handling storing or distributing material that is insulting andor degrading to other individuals is prohibited.
 rules for it security
 the user account is strictly personal and may not be used by any other person.
 the user account will be closed when the user no longer studies or works at the university. university west can delete a user account and its data that has been inactive for more than 6 months.
 it is not permitted to sabotage the system or by other means deny other users access to the system.
 it is not permitted to use misconfigurations program errors or other methods to obtain extended system authorization.
 it is not permitted to use the universitys systems to try to sabotage or gain illegal access to external systems.
 if you discover errors sabotage security breaches or other problems report them to the servicecenter as soon as possible.
 university west will not be responsible for consequences of the unavailability of itresources.
 only computers owned by the university may be connected to the universitys computer communication network.
 all other established guidelines and rules for itsecurity at university west apply.
 rules for programmes at the first and secondcycle levels
 rules for writing syllabi
 rules for writing course guidelines
 rules for examination
 rules for the classification of courses in disciplinary domains
 footnotes
 corresponds to standards and guidelines for quality assurance in the european higher education area esg section 1.3. this is part of the universitys process 3.1.1.1 creating resources for courses and programmes 3.1.11 preparing the syllabus.
 there should be a syllabus for every course. according to chapter 6 section 15 of the higher education ordinance a syllabus should contain information about the level of the course the number of credits the intended learning outcomes any special entry requirements forms of assessment and any other necessary information.
 the syllabus is a legally binding document.
 2. components of a syllabus
 at university west a syllabus must always include the following
 this identifies the course.
 a new course code is required if a course is modified in a way that affects the students studies for example the transfer of credits entry requirements or similar. exactly what sort of changes require a new course code must be determined from case to case. entry requirements grading scale scope level main field of study and changes to the name of the course are changes that can affect a students studies and in such cases these changes should lead to a new course code. see however the section other information below.
 minor changes and clarifications of the name of the course for example do not require a new course code.
 the title of the course is the name of the course in swedish and english. use the dictionary provided by the swedish council for higher education.
 the number of higher education credits the course is worth.
 established
 syllabi including reading lists for programmes must be approved at least eight weeks before the course starts.
 approved by
 the decisionmaking body that approves the syllabus.
 here the date  term and year  show when the syllabus has gone into effect.
 this is the educational level at which the course is offered educational level for foundation year programme.
 each 1st and 2ndcycle course is given a code for progressive specialization. the code is a prefix in the university syllabus system and is a classification indicating prerequisite studies described in more detail under the heading entry requirements. there are different codes for 1st and 2ndcycle courses depending upon prerequisites and whether a degree project is part of the course.
 every course the university offers must be classified under one or more disciplinary domains. read more in rules för classification of courses into disciplinary domains at university west.
 intended learning outcomes
 a clear description of the intended learning outcomes for the course i.e. the results the student is to attain to receive a passing grade in the course.
 the prerequisite studies that the student needs to have credits in to be able to benefit from the course.  possible exceptions to these basic requirements should be stated in the syllabus. if there are specific entry requirements i.e. prior knowledge needed to be able to pass the course it should be stated here.
 forms of assessment
 the format for revisingsupplementing the original exam must be the same. the following text can be used if it is adapted to the course in question
 if a student has not demonstrated that they have attained the intended learning outcomes but is close to doing so the examiner can give them the opportunity to revisesupplement the first exam to meet the criteria for passing. revisingsupplementing an exam should be suited to the particular situation based upon  the intended learning outcomes that the student did not attain and should be submitted within two weeks after the student has been informed of the result and before the next time the exam is offered.
 if a segment of the course is compulsory this should be indicated in the syllabus. normally it is only when class participation or a task is assessed that it can be compulsory. other parts of the course can only be compulsory if there is a specific reason. it should also be stated in the syllabus if there is an opportunity to make up for having missed doing something that was compulsory.
 limiting the number of exams
 it should be stated in the syllabus if students have a limited number of chances to pass an exam. see the universitys rules for examination regarding the possibility of limiting the number of times students can take an exam.
 the main content and structure of the course should be described briefly concisely and objectively in continuous text.
 one purpose is to facilitate the decision on credit transfer another to provide information about the content of a course that belongs to a certain field of study if the course is classified on more than one. the content should be formulated in such a general way that the syllabus does not need to be revised before each course opportunity. avoid involving the reader in the text through personal pronouns. if the course consists of modules these can be specified with scope in higher education credits goals and content.
 under this heading all syllabi should have a reference to the universitys rules for examination.
 furthermore the languages of instruction should be indicated under this heading. normally a course is taught in swedish or english. if more than one possible language has been indicated in the syllabus the precise language decided upon must be established by the time the course is offered. the possibility of specifying dual languages of instruction should be used very restrictively. it should also at this time be made clear whether the course will be offered on campus or online.
 the grading scale that will be applied for the course is also under this heading. the grading scales that can be used at university west are found in the universitys rules for examination.
 the possibility of taking an adapted examination should also be indicated here for those students who have a documented disability as per the definition provided in the antidiscrimination law. see the universitys rules for examination.
 an overlap is when two courses correspond to each other in terms of learning outcomes and are therefore equivalent which means that the courses cannot both be part of the same degree.
 it should be stated in the syllabus that in certain circumstances the university can interrupt a students placement. it should also be stated what a student needs to do to arrange a new placement. see the universitys rules for examination.
 the reading list is part of the syllabus and should be attached in an appendix to the syllabus.
 a programme syllabus contains information about requirements and it is legally binding for both the university and for the student. the purpose of the programme syllabus is to help the student understand what will be expected of them on the programme.
 the higher education ordinance ch. 6 section 17 states that a programme syllabus must contain information about the courses that make up the programme specific entry requirements and other necessary information.
 if a programme is going to be taught in english the entire programme syllabus must be translated into english. the terms used must be in accordance with the swedishenglish dictionary provided by the swedish council for higher education. each department is responsible for seeing to it that the translation is correct.
 the university has the right to make changes to courses on a programme without obtaining permission from the students on the programme so long as the changes do not affect the intended learning outcomes for the programme and its degree to which the student has been accepted.
 2. components of a programme syllabus
 at university west the following information should be found in a programme syllabus
 the name of the programme
 the name of the programme in both swedish and english
 the number of he credits received after completing the programme.
 the code that identifies the programme
 the degrees in both swedish and english earned upon completion of the programme
 the educational level of the programme
 the date on which the programme was adopted by the board
 decisionmaking body
 the body that has taken the decision to adopt the programme syllabus
 the term and year when the programme begins
 prerequisites for beginning studies without which the student cannot benefit from the programme
 indicate the language of instruction
 the following permanent text has been added to the template for the programme syllabus
 students who have been admitted to the programme outlined in this programme syllabus are guaranteed admission to courses according to the above list provided that the student follows the established study route for the programme. reservation is made however for changes that can occur while remaining within the frame of the qualitative targets when revising the programme syllabus and the courses included therein. regarding possible choices made for a specialisation within the programme there is guaranteed admission to courses chosen for that specialisation.
 programmes taught in english must have a translation of the national qualitative targets that follows the english translation of the system of qualification provided by the swedish council for higher education.
 compulsory courses on the programme
 here it is indicated which courses are compulsory for students on the programme. furthermore under a separate heading see below it should be made clear which courses are electives with guaranteed admission at university west and what opportunities there are to take optional courses. it should be clear how many credits are compulsory and how many credits are to be in electives or optional courses on the programme.
 elective courses on the programme
 under this heading there should be a list of electives that are offered with a guarantee of admission on the relevant programme at university west.
 the following permanent text is in the template for programme syllabiamong the programmes compulsory courses xx he credits are electives and offered with a guarantee of admission for students on the programme. you can choose from the courses listed below.
 optional courses on the programme
 this is included if there is a possibility to take optional courses i.e. such courses that the students can choose themselves at university west or at another institution of higher learning in sweden or abroad. there should be clear information about a recommended study route such as what is possible with regard to a chosen specialization on the programme.
 the following text is included in the template for the programme syllabusthis programme includes xx he credits of optional courses. you can choose among the courses below but you can also take other courses as long as the intended learning targets do not overlap with the degree courses. you can take these courses at university west or another institution of higher learning either in sweden or abroad.
 preliminary study route
 the following text is in the template for the programme syllabusa study route presents the order in which and when courses on a programme are offered. to see the programmes preliminary study route provide the name of the programmeprogramme code at hv.sestudiegang.
 entry requirements for the programme
 this is where prerequisite courses are listed. it may be the case that there are particular reasons for knowledge being accumulated by way of a certain progression so that students must have passed certain courses to be able to continue on the programme. in this case entry requirements must be indicated in the programme syllabus. when entry requirements are set for a course on a programme they should also be checked for corresponding freestanding courses.
 to declare that a student does not possess the necessary prerequisites to continue on the programme a document stating this decision must be produced. this sort of decision can be appealed to the higher education appeals board.
 programmes that include placement must explain how a student discontinues their studies as well as how the student in this case can return to their studies. this should be stated in both the programme syllabus and the syllabus for the placement course.
 workintegrated learning wil main heading
 a permanent text that cannot be changed is included in the template for the programme syllabus.
 wilcertification subheading
 a text that cannot be changed is included in the template for the programme syllabus.there is also space in the document for free text related to this heading. here you can indicate any specific information about the programme that is connected to wil.
 programmes that are not certified can choose to delete the text mentioned above. this way the heading is not included in the programme syllabus.
 other information main heading
 place any other specific information about the programme here.
 corresponds to standards and guidelines for quality assurance in the european higher education area esg section 1.3.
 the purpose of course guidelines is to provide such information that students need to be able to plan their studies. the information in the syllabus takes precedence over that found in the course guidelines. in contrast to what is written in the syllabus course guidelines are not legally binding.
 information in the course guidelines may not contradict that which is stated in the syllabus.
 the department is responsible for establishing course guidelines for each course when it is offered and that students can access these guidelines no later than two weeks before the course starts. as a rule the course guidelines are published digitally in the universitys virtual learning environment. students are responsible for knowing what is stated in the course guidelines.
 2. components of a course guidelines
 course guidelines must always contain contact information information about examination and compulsory segments of the course as well as the use of generative ai.
 information on misleading of examination must be given in all course guidelines and in the form specified below. the layout and design for course guidelines should be consistent for all courses on a programme.
 information about the examiner the course coordinator and the instructors that will be teaching on the course as well as how the student can get in touch with them.
 the use of generative ai
 information about the way generative ai is to be used is provided in the same way as it is for other educational tools. for clarity all course guidelines for students should include an explanation of the way generative ai should and may be used on the course. the use of generative ai in connection with an exam must be clearly stated in the course guidelines. if using generative ai is prohibited on an exam its use will be considered an attempt to deceive the examiner.
 examinations
 information about when examinations will take place and what will be expected of the student. forms of assessment should be consistent with what is stated in the syllabus but be described in more detail. it should  be clear what is meant when an examination task is to be done individually or in a group.
 it is particularly important that the course guidelines for degree project courses clarify the information provided in the syllabus regarding examination format and clearly state the way they are related to one another in terms of scheduling.
 if there are several aspects of the course that will be assessed it is important to indicate to what degree each aspect is important in terms of the course as a whole.
 information should also be provided as to when opportunities for a second chance to be examined will occur and what will be expected of the student.
 to ensure clarity for students a text about the way ai may be used in connection with an exam must be provided. in the case that an exam requires the use of ai tools such as in the creation of an external user account equal access should be taken into consideration. if there is a risk that the prohibited use of generative ai could occur while students are writing an exam other andor supplementary methods of examination should be considered.
 the course guidelines should contain clearly stated information about plagiarism and attempting to deceive the examiner. it should also be clear that documents are run through antiplagiarism software and that if plagiarism or an attempt to deceive the examiner is suspected the incident will be reported to the universitys disciplinary board.
 compulsory segments
 if there are segments of the course that are compulsory this must be stated in the syllabus. it must also be stated in the syllabus if the student can make up for some compulsory segment they have missed doing. the course guidelines should state when the compulsory segments or makeup work should be done.
 information on misleading of examination cheating
 the following text must be included in all course guidelines at university west to ensure that all students have been given the same information
 misleading of examination so called cheating can with the support of the higher education ordinance 1993 100 lead to a written warning or suspension from studies. therefore it is important that you are aware of what is not allowed.
 cheating is about trying to make an examination performance appear bigger better or in some other way of higher quality than would otherwise have been the case. this can for example be about plagiarism the use of unauthorized aids illicit cooperation etc. see more information at
 if you use text that someone else has written from literature other student work internet etc. you must clearly state the source. the same goes for direct translations. quotes must be marked with quotation marks. the examiner must be able to clearly see what is your own text and what is written by others. if a source reference or quotation mark is missing it may be counted as plagiarism which may lead to you being suspended from your studies.
 if you reuse a text that you have previously been examined for it may be considered selfplagiarism. therefore be sure to clearly state whether your text has already been used by you in another examination.
 to detect plagiarism högskolan väst uses ouriginal a software for plagiarism control. ouriginals source material is extensive and consists of both published and unpublished texts such as previous students work.
 teachers who suspect misleading of examination are required to report this to the vicechancellor who decides if it should be referred to the disciplinary board at university west.
 examples of other information that can be placed in the course guidelines
 learning and teaching design
 the reading list
 reading scheduleinstructions
 reference documentation style
 course evaluation and the results of previous course evaluations
 when results will be made available
 what technological tools are needed
 the sharing of responsibilities between the instructors teaching on the course
 information about placement
 clarification of wil segments
 corresponds to standards and guidelines for quality assurance in the european higher education area esg section 1.3. this is part of the universitys process 3.3.1.1 course implementation.
 all degrees except those in vocational studies require a passing grade on a degree project. the number of he credits the project is worth depends upon the programme. entry requirements for degree project courses are stated in each syllabus.
 a degree project involves planning carrying out and reporting back on a study authoring a thesis defending it in a seminar as well as reviewing and discussing the content of another students project paper that is at the same level acting as discussant.
 a degree project is written alone or with at the most one other student.
 before the final review the paper undergoes a check for plagiarism.
 supervision is provided within the framework of the course when it is offered unless otherwise agreed. a student who does not finish their paper before the course ends will normally not have the right to further supervision. exceptions can be made if the examiner and the student have come to an agreement.
 decisions regarding possible resources for continued supervision are made by the department head. if a degree project receives a failing grade the student no longer has any right to supervision.
 supervision is provided by someone who has indepth qualifications in the subject area methodology and analysis. when necessary someone without scholarly competence may work with the supervisor by supplying guidance in the use of equipment tools or the handling of data.
 the examiner and the supervisor must be two different individuals.
 part of the examination of a degree project is a seminar at which the student defends the paper they have written and one at which they discuss another students paper.
 if a degree project has been written by two students each individual students contribution is assessed separately when a final draft is submitted after the seminar. in the paper itself or in an appendix each student must account for their individual contribution to and participation in the project.
 the supervisor determines when the paper is ready for assessment. the examiner who assesses the paper and the students defence thereof awards a grade. the degree project course must have clearly defined criteria as to what is required for a passing grade on the paper and its defence at the seminar. the supervisor and the examiner must have agreed upon the criteria.
 students do not have the right to appeal an examiners assessment or the grade they received but they do have the right to request a reevaluation of the decision.
 the discussion at the seminar should clearly address what about the project needs to be revised and a timeframe for doing this.
 the examiner reports the grade in ladok as soon as possible after examination. this also applies to a failing grade. if the degree project is never submitted no grade is reported.
 if revisions are needed after the final review seminar it is the date that the examiner passes the revised paper that becomes the date of examination.
 as with other courses the student has the right to a retake in accordance with what is stated in the guidelines for examination. one examination and one opportunity to retake the examination must be offered each time the course runs.
 it is usually recommended that a student who has twice received a failing grade on the same paper write an entirely new paper.
 4. the title of the degree project
 the title of the degree project will be stated on the diploma. special guidelines for how the title is to be written can be found on the librarys webpage.
 5. archiving and publication
 all electronic archiving is carried out by university administration after the examiner has sent in the project in electronic format as well as documentation that shows a passing grade.
 the university encourages students to publish degree projects that have received a passing grade. this is done by the library after the student has authorised them to do so. if a student does not authorise the publication of their project in its entirety only the bibliographical data and abstract will be made available.
 provisions regarding examination can be found in the higher education ordinance 1993100 and in the higher education authoritys guidelines for legally certain examination 4th ed. provisions relating to examination and grading cases can also be found in other laws and ordinances such as the administrative procedure act 2017900 the freedom of the press act 1949105 or official authority ordinance 2007515.
 the following local regulations should be seen as a supplement to and clarification of the provisions mentioned above. all syllabi at university west must make reference to these local regulations.
 2. examiners
 an examiner is appointed through a decision made by the department head. a list of examiners is entered into the daybook and archived. only an instructor who is employed by university west may be appointed as an examiner.
 examiners must have relevant competence in relation to the subject and level of the course that is to be examined. with regard to degree projects at the 1stcycle level and courses at the 2ndcycle level examiners are required to have a licentiate or doctoral degree. examiners must also have sound knowledge of the regulations that apply to examination at the university.
 examiners have the ultimate responsibility for examination of a course. examiners set the final grades for a course even if other instructors have assessed parts of it. examiners are also responsible for any reassessment of a grade if requested by a student and they are the ones to sign off on the grades in the administrative system.
 student who has failed a course twice has the right to request that the department head appoints a new examiner. this request can be denied if for example there is no other qualified examiner at the university. if the request for a new examiner is denied this cannot be appealed.
 3. types of examination
 examinations test knowledge skills and abilities in relation to the intended learning outcomes of a course content and grading. several parts of the course can be the basis for examination written invigilated exams takehome exams laboratory work etc.
 the examiner decides which types of examination will be used on a course. each of these must be stated in the syllabus and are legally binding.
 the same legal requirements apply for digital examinations as for all other examinations.
 4. time and place for examination
 at the beginning of a course or at least five weeks before any examination takes place examiners are responsible for seeing to it that students receive an examination schedule that lists each course component  for which they will be examined. this information is normally provided in the course guidelines.
 examination of online courses is carried out at a location that is indicated in information to the students.
 in extenuating circumstances such as disability or illness the examiner may allow the student  to take an exam at a venue other than the location at which they have been studying. this applies to both campus and online courses. in this case examination must take place at the same time as it is carried out at university west. students who wish to be examined elsewhere are responsible for booking a place for their examination at that location and to do so in good time. this venue must be appropriate. there must be an invigilator and there must be a seat available in the room. the person who provides the venue is responsible for practical issues relating to the examination.
 students from other institutions of higher learning may not be offered the opportunity to take oncampus examination at university west except for exchange students who risk not completing andor starting their studies on time.
 5. adapted examination
 an examiner can take the decision to allow an examination to be adapted for a student who has a documented need for special educational support due to their disability. taking an examination that has been adapted does not mean that the student no longer needs to fulfil the requirements established for intended learning outcomes that the examination is testing rather it only means that the student can demonstrate having fulfilled the requirements in another way. the syllabus should indicate if there is a possibility to have an examination adapted to special needs.
 it is permitted to schedule exams on saturdays and sundays but it should be taken into consideration that there may be students espousing faiths that prevent them from taking an exam on religious holidays.
 as a rule the number of times a student can take an exam is not limited. within the framework of a course that is offered the student has a right to take a regularly scheduled exam and to do a resit.  thereafter the student is given the opportunity to take the exam the next time the same course course code is offered at university west. examinations are always scheduled in accordance with a valid syllabus for the course being offered. it is the students responsibility to stay informed of any changes to the syllabus.
 the date for a resit is announced no later than at the time of the ordinarily scheduled exam. no fewer than ten working days or two weeks may pass between posting the results of an exam and the date for the resit on condition that the normal time allotted for grading fifteen working days has not been increased.
 if it is clearly stated in the syllabus the number of opportunities to take an exam can be limited. in total the number of opportunities to take an exam may not be fewer than five. there can only be limitations if it is determined that an unlimited number of opportunities would lead to an unreasonable waste of resources in the case of a particular course. 1 if a course is discontinued the student has the right to attempt the exam three times over a period of at least one year after the last opportunity to take the regularly scheduled exam when that course was offered.
 an examiner giving a resit may test that the student has attained all the same intended learning outcomes for the course or module of the course. the types of examination should be the same as those used for the regularly scheduled examination unless otherwise stated in the syllabus. what applies to the compensatory assignment in the form of compulsory elements describes under the heading compulsory course components.
 any student who has missed an opportunity to take an exam due to a mistake made by the university shall be offered a new opportunity to take the exam within two weeks from the originally scheduled examination date.
 a student who has not achieved the intended learning outcomes and has thus failed a course should normally be tested against the same intended learning outcomes again by means of a resit. the examiner can decide that the student should submit supplementary assignments to qualify as having passed on condition that this possibility is clearly stated in the syllabus. it should be indicated in the syllabus what the supplementary work to be done involves and how much time will be allowed. the type of supplementary qualification must correspond to the original type of examination.
 supplementary qualification may only be offered if the exams shortcomings are minimal and easy to remedy in a short amount of time soon after the exam was taken. supplementary qualification is not permitted after failing an invigilated exam.
 8. compulsory course components
 if there are compulsory components of a course on which the students grade will be based  this must be indicated in the syllabus. compulsory components on which grades are not based may only make up a small portion of the course. only examinable components of a programme or those that have the purpose of enhancing the students ability to learn can be compulsory.
 students who for some reason have failed a compulsory component of a course will be offered another opportunity during or soon after the course has ended.
 examiners may allow a student to make a compensatory assignment as a compensation for attendance at a compulsory seminar. in that case the possibility of such compensatory assignment must be clearly stated in the syllabus. in cases where it is not possible to provide compensatory assignment a resit is required see rules for resit.
 9. examination of degree projects and placements
 in general the same rules apply to degree projects and placements such as student teaching or internships as do for other courses.
 supervisors and examiners must be different people.
 it should be stated in the syllabus if there is a limitation to the number of occasions for placement or similar components of a programme that are spent off campus. if a student needs to have a passing grade in a placement or similar component to pass the course or a module of the course there must be at least two opportunities to do such a placement or similar component of a programme.
 as a rule grades are set only after a student has finished a course. an examiner can however fail a student before a course has ended  if there is a particular reason for doing so. one such reason could be that the university discontinues the placement because the student has made serious mistakes and risks causing injury or damage during placement. the conditions for preemptively failing a student and for the students possibility of starting over must be stated in the syllabus.
 10. invigilated exams
 during invigilated exams the examiner for a course should be available either by telephone or digitally. the instructor should let the students know what resource materials are permitted before the exam. this should also be indicated on the cover sheet of the exam.
 if an invigilated exam has to be discontinued due to an evacuation the examiner determines whether the exam can continue after the interruption giving the students a time extension equivalent to the interruption or if the students exam will have to be rescheduled.
 it should be stated in the syllabus whether a takehome exam is to be done individually or can be done in a group. if the exam can be done in a group the students must be able to receive individual grades. if an examiner is in doubt concerning an individual students performance they can request that the student do an oral exam within ten days of the date of submission.
 the student is responsible for seeing to it that their takehome exam has reached the instructor who is to assess it. if a late submission can affect the students grade this must be stated in the syllabus.
 when exams are submitted anonymously socalled coded exams anonymity is broken as late as possible. the examiner must however be able to see the names of the students before setting their grades.
 original exam papers are saved for two years from the date the grade was reported and thereafter they are culled in accordance with national archives regulations.
 11. the use of generative ai during an examination
 as is the case with other educational tools the decision regarding how generative ai should be used is taken by each individual examiner. the use of generative ai in connection with an exam is stated in the course guidelines. in the event that an examination requires the use of an ai tool such as in the creation of an external user account equal access should be taken into consideration. if there is a risk that the prohibited use of generative ai could occur while students are writing an exam other andor supplementary methods of examination should be considered.
 grades are set once a course has been concluded. if the instructor assessing the student finds that due to a students absence from compulsory components of the course they do not have sufficient records on which to base a grade no grade can be set.
 any student who has begun an examination must receive a grade. the term begun can be understood differently depending upon the type of examination. the examiner determines when a student is deemed to have begun an exam. in the case of invigilated exams any student who enters the examination hall but submits a blank paper or nothing at all will receive a failing grade.
 grading criteria are stated on the exam paper or in the course guidelines but they are not legally binding. 2
 when a group is to be examined together their presentation should be carried out in such a way as to make it clear what each individual student has contributed. to receive a passing grade in a course the student must have been tested against all of the intended learning outcomes stated in the syllabus and have received a passing grade on each of them.
 at university west a grade has been decided upon when it is entered into the administrative system and signed by the examiner. at this time it is ensured that the grade is in swedish and that the name of the person setting the final grade the examiner as well as when applicable the names of any other instructors who have participated in the assessmentmarking are stated. in the universitys rules of procedure it is stated that grades can be decided upon without any presentation.
 as a rule students receive their result on each examined component of the course within 15 working days of the date for examination. if the class is large the instructor has 20 days to report results to the students. in that case students should be informed no later than on the day of the examination that there will be an extension made to the time allowed for grading. see also the section about resits for the shortest time between reporting examination results to students and the date of the resit.
 an examiners decision on a grade cannot be appealed. however a student does have the right to request that the decision be reconsidered. this request must be in writing and submitted to the examiner together with the reason for the request. if the examiner finds that the decision was obviously incorrect it will be changed but only if the change can occur quickly and easily without lowering the grade. it is prohibited to set time limits on when a student can request that a grade be reconsidered.
 a passing grade may not be changed to a failing grade at the students request. marking that disadvantages the student can occur if the decision was purely an oversight error. 3 practice supports lowering a students grade if it has been shown that the student cheated on the exam.
 a student may not participate in a resit for the purpose of raising a passing grade. in swedish this is called plussning.
 when a grade has been decided the students exam paper or written documentation that serves as the basis for their grade as well as the grade itself become public records. once an exam has been given the exam form itself is archived and is available to the public.
 14. the grading system and grading scales
 the swedish grading system is criterion referenced. at university west one of the following grading scales is used on programmes at the 1st and 2ndcycle levels
 pass with distinctionpassfail
 on the af scale f and fx are failing results. fx represents a failing grade and indicates that more work is required. the grade fx cannot be set as the final grade in a course.
 it should be stated in the syllabus which grading scale applies for each course.
 in thirdcycle programmes the only grading scale used is passfail.
 the passfail grading scale may not be used for teacher education courses that have a placement component that is worth more than three he credits.
 15. attempting to deceive the examiner
 provisions concerning attempts to deceive the examiner what is commonly known as cheating are laid out in chapter 10 of the higher education ordinance.
 cheating or attempting to deceive the examiner refers to a student purposely trying to deceive the examiner when their performance on a course is to be assessed. examples of this sort of behaviour are plagiarism prohibited use of generative ai using crib sheets or disallowed notes in books that may be taken into the examination hall or collaborating on an exam on which the individual student is to be graded.
 at the beginning of each course students must be given unambiguous information regarding the definition of plagiarism and the correct method of referencing sources. wellfounded suspicion of an attempt to deceive the examiner will be reported to the vice chancellor as soon as possible. at the vice chancellors request the case is thereafter investigated by administrative personnel. at some point during the investigation the student will be given the opportunity to explain their behaviour orally or in writing thus providing their version of what has happened.
 after the investigation the vice chancellor hands down a decision as to whether the case will be dropped without taking any action leading to a socalled v.c.s warning or be sent on to the disciplinary board for a hearing. the disciplinary board can decide to drop the case without taking any action issue a warning or hand down a decision to suspend the student. suspension means that for a certain period of time at the most six months the student may not take exams go to classes or take part in any other activity within the framework of their studies.
 an examination that is reported for suspicion of attempting to deceive the examiner is not graded until the vice chancellordisciplinary board has come to a decision. if the case is sent on to the disciplinary board the vice chancellor can decide that the student will be intermittently suspended. otherwise the student is not stopped from participating in other classes or examinations during the period of investigation. after a decision to suspend the student has been taken the affected services are informed by the administration and the  students it account is blocked. if any components of the course are examined during the period of suspension the student must wait until a resit opportunity or the next time the course is offered and the examination is given.
 in accordance with standards and guidelines for quality assurance in the european higher education area esg section 1.3. this is part of the universitys process called education 3.3.6. evaluating programmes.
 the university is responsible for giving students on a course the opportunity to air their views in an evaluation provided by the university. it is also the universitys responsibility to compile the results of the evaluations and make the results available to the students as well as to take any measures necessary in response to the evaluations. 4
 course evaluations are an important opportunity for students to contribute to the universitys efforts to improve programmes and courses. through them the student has the opportunity constructively to think about their education and to actively exercise their legal right to have an influence on the programme they are taking.
 the document rules for course evaluations provides guidance in our work with course evaluations and applies to courses at all levels i.e. programmes at the 1st 2nd and 3rdcycle levels.
 a course evaluation consists of students views and suggestions when they evaluate how a course has functioned in relation to the syllabus.
 a course evaluation report is a compilation of results obtained from submitted course evaluations.
 a course evaluation response is a compilation of the students views and suggestions as well as the instructors comments about them. the course evaluation response is made available to the students within five weeks after the course has ended.
 a course evaluation is always generated digitally in conjunction with or near the end of the course. course evaluations are conducted for all courses even those in which students write an essay or do a degree project. the course coordinator andor the instructor can carry out additional course evaluations during the course. the automatically generated course evaluation is conducted each time the course is offered and not for course modules or an entire package of courses. the questionnaire is carried out in the language of instruction.
 it is very important that students contribute to the development of courses by answering the questions on course evaluations but this is voluntary. instructors and students have a shared responsibility for developing and improving courses and therefore various types of evaluations and dialogues can be carried out during the course. these are conducted to increase students involvement and the response rate.
 written evaluations must be anonymous. anonymity means that any name or other way of identifying the respondent is not to be found on the course evaluation nor can this be sought after. personal integrity must be taken into consideration in all work with course evaluations.
 results from course evaluations must be kept accessible on the website for students and other interested parties. responsibility for different parts of the evaluation process is indicated by the quality assurance system.
 to prepare certain decisions regarding programmes at the 1st and 2ndcycle levels there should be a programme board at the departmental level. the purpose is to facilitate interaction within the department and between departmental management and the departmental board thus improving the quality of the programmes.
 these rules describe the demands made upon all programme boards.
 all programmes must have members on the programme board or similar. there must be a programme board for programmes and other main areas of study that lead to a degree from university west. the department head is also responsible for ensuring that freestanding courses and any contract education awarding credits and associated with a main area of study are included in the work done by the programme board. courses in supporting subjects without a natural connection to the main area of study will be handled by a programme board or similar.
 2. the composition of the programme board
 a programme board consists of representatives from the teaching staff who have been appointed by the head of department in consultation with the department board as well as student representatives who are appointed by the university west student union in accordance with the student union ordinance and the contract concluded by the student union and university west. the head of department in consultation with the department board appoints a chairperson for each programme board. this person convenes and chairs the meetings. it is also beneficial to coopt external representatives from relevant fields to sit on the programme board as this strengthens the social relevance of the programme.
 3. areas of responsibility for programme boards
 the programme board should
 make every effort to ensure that students are provided with all that they need to achieve the nationally and locally established intended learning outcomes
 work with quality assurance within the framework of the universitys and the departments systems for quality assurance in programmes
 collect viewpoints from students instructors and external stakeholders thus taking responsibility for them being provided with opportunities to participate in the planning implementation and evaluation of the programme.
 otherwise the programme board works along the lines of the specific departmental work that the head of department is tasked with.
 every course the university offers must be classified under one or more disciplinary domains. the universitys public service agreements determine the disciplinary domains that can be chosen. classification is what determines the scope of government funding received by the university as a whole for a fulltime equivalent and annual performance equivalent. the way the funding is distributed within the university is decided by the vice chancellor.
 the following disciplinary domains can be found at university west
 id physical education
 te engineering and technology
 the government or swedish higher education authority has not provided any further instructions regarding the way courses should be classified. in the preparatory work however it is made clear that the subject area to which the course belongs should be decisive not the degree to which students taking the course aspire.5
 in our public service agreement the following areas are named teaching placement and other
 the disciplinary domain teaching refers to programmes within the core education subjects.
 the discipline domain placement refers to placement in schools and preschools.
 the discipline domain other refers to programmes in journalism and library science as well as practicalaesthetics courses that are part of the teacher education programmes in early childhood education and primary education.
 for university west the public service agreement also indicates
 the disciplinary domain physical education referring to certain courses within the framework of the teacher education programme.
 in addition to that which is listed above at university west the following applies.
 usually only one disciplinary domain is assigned to a course. it is the main subject content of the course that determines its classification i.e. whatever is actually taught on the course. classification should therefore not take teaching methods requirements for equipment forms of examination or similar into consideration.6  classification should take subject groups as guidance.
 a course can be offered two in exceptional cases more disciplinary domains if the course contains elements with clearly identifiable subject content that belongs to different subject areas.7 the percentual division between disciplinary domains should then be in accordance with the percentual division within the course content.
 a course can also have two or in exceptional cases more disciplinary domains in the case that the course is clearly multi or interdisciplinary with segments belonging to two or more subject areas with an overlap between  contributions from various disciplinary domains.8
 1 the higher education authority legally certain examination 4th edition p. 35.2 the higher education authority legally certain examination 4th edition p. 33.3 for the definition of oversight error see the higher education authority legally certain examination 4th ed. pp. 8788.4 the higher education ordinance ch. 1 section 14 gives students who participate in or have finished a course the opportunity to account for their experience of and views about the course through a course evaluation that is provided by the university. the university must compile course evaluations and publish results as well as any decisions to take measures in response to the course evaluations. results must remain accessible to the students. ordinance 2000651.5 proposition 199293169 higher education for increased competence.6 the same course can be part of several different main fields that are traditionally associated with different disciplinary domains and even counted as part of the progression in such a main field on the condition that the course has a clear connection to the intended learning outcomes for the programme.7  if a course contains modules that clearly belong to a different subject area and in principle would function as a freestanding smaller scale course at the university level that module should be classified in accordance with that modules disciplinary domain. for example a module that includes mathematical statistics as part of a social science methodology course in which the first part is classified as natural sciences and the rest social sciences. 8 courses in for example sustainability environmental science or practical degree projects can depending on the layout and the orientation of subject content constitute examples of courses that span several disciplinary domains.
 rules for the processing of personal data in student degree projects
 rules for students processing of personal data
 on this site you will find a description of the rules that apply at university west for how you as a student may process personal data within the framework of your education. there are also templates and other practical information.
 the general data protection regulation gdpr is the law that applies to the processing of personal data and was introduced by all member states of the eu on 25 may 2018. the regulation stipulates that all processing of personal data carried out must comply with the fundamental principles set out in the general data protection regulation.
 the universitys responsibilty and the students responsibility
 the university is responsible for students processing of personal data within the framework of their studies socalled personal data controller. this means that you as a student have an obligation to ensure that your own personal data processing takes place in accordance with the universitys decided rules when working with for example essays assignments and degree projects.
 students processing of personal data
 processing of personal data within the framework of education may only take place in accordance with the universitys rules and guidelines and on the teachers instructions or after the teacherssupervisors approval. processing of personal data is a broad concept and includes all actions that are carried out with the personal data electronically. examples of processing are collection registration organisation structuring storage processing alteration retrieval reading use disclosure dissemination or otherwise provided adjustment or combination restriction deletion or destruction of personal data.
 sensitive personal data i.e. both sensitive and personal data that warrants extra protection may never be processed in first and secondcycle education.
 personal data means any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person. the decisive factor is that the information individually or in combination with other data is capable of identifying a living person. examples of personal data are personal identity numbers names contact details such as email addresses electronic identities of various kinds such as usernames on social media as well as image andor audio recordings. this and other personal data that appears in interview responses questionnaire responses images and other collected empirical data are covered by these rules.
 please note that even if you do not know or even have the opportunity to find out who the person is it may be processing of personal data. it is sufficient that someone can link the data to a natural person for it to be considered as personal data. in order to determine whether a natural person is identifiable you must consider the possibility of additional information as well as any means that may reasonably be used to directly or indirectly identify the natural person.
 the general data protection regulation lists special categories of personal data that are considered particularly sensitive and therefore have a stronger protection socalled sensitive personal data. as a general rule sensitive personal data may not be processed by students during their studies.
 ethnic origin
 religious or philosophical beliefs
 trade union membership
 health
 sex life or sexual orientation
 in addition to the information listed above there are other types of personal data that are particularly worthy of protection according to swedish authority for privacy protection. these can be for example
 salary information
 data on violations of the law
 evaluative data such as data from performance appraisals data on the results of personality tests or personality profiles
 information relating to someones private sphere
 checklist for the processing of personal data
 specify the purpose and document the processing of personal data
 always start by determining the purpose purpose of the work you are going to carry out and what data is necessary to collect and process in order to achieve the purpose of the work.
 always consider what personal data is necessary to collect in order to fulfil the purpose of the work. contact your teacher or supervisor for consultation if you are unsure. in the event of a disagreement between teacher and student about the need for processing personal data the teachers instructions apply.
 keep in mind that no superfluous personal data may be collected but personal data that is processed must be adequate and relevant for the purpose of the processing. personal data collected for student work may only be processed for the student work for which it has been collected and no other purposes or purposes.
 determine the method of collection processing and storage
 decide how you will collect store and otherwise process the personal data.
 when collecting only tools and services provided by the university may be used. it is not allowed to use free services that you can access freely on the internet.
 keep in mind that personal data must be stored and processed in a secure manner to protect it against unauthorized or unauthorized processing loss or destruction. to achieve this you should adhere to at least the below points
 the personal data must be stored in the universitys it systems and storage space such as canvas your own home directory in the universitys it environment or your own onedrive provided by the university. no private cloud storage may be used.
 no personal data may be stored on a private computer mobile phone usb stick or other private device.
 if private mobile phones are used to record audio or video in interviews for example recording and storage may not take place directly in the mobile phone. instead the students shall record audio and video via  m365 either onenote or onedrive which can be downloaded as an app to the mobile phone. please note that you must log in with your student account in the apps
 determine and ensure that only authorized persons have access to the personal data by for example passwordprotecting folders for storage.
 report the processing to the register
 the university is obliged to keep a register of its personal data processing. before you start processing your personal data you must therefore report your work to the universitys register.
 obtain consent and inform about the processing
 before you begin collecting or processing personal data you must obtain consent from the person whose personal data is to be processed the socalled data subject. the processing of minors personal data requires the consent of the childs guardian.
 consent must be obtained before the processing of personal data begins and must be in writing. the template for consent and information about the processing of personal data in student work must be used. the forms must be collected and stored for the duration of the processing of personal data.
 the data subject always has the right to withdraw their consent. if the consent is withdrawn the student must immediately stop processing the personal data and delete it.
 collect the personal data and carry out your work
 once consent has been obtained the collection of personal data can begin. all collection must take place in a secure manner and for digital interviews surveys or the like the universitys approved systems software and cloud services must always be used. open or private systems software or cloud services may not be used.
 personal data may not be collected in such a way that personal data is stored on a private computer mobile phone usb stick or other private device. if private mobile phones are used audio and video must be recorded via apps for either onenote or onedrive so that the storage takes place directly in the cloud under the universitys control.
 remember to protect personal data throughout the course of the work so that no unauthorized person gains access to it.
 terminate the processing and delete the personal data
 after the work has been completed a notification of the cessation of processing must be sent to the universitys register of records.
 personal data must be deleted from all storage areas when the data is no longer necessary but no later than when the work has been approved. this does not apply to final products such as finished assignments essays degree projects and the like. deletion means that the personal data cannot be recovered.
 templates
 template_consent and information about processing of personal data in student work.docx
 hrspecialister
 helpful or not?  a qualitative study on female adolescents experience of tiktok when recovering from anorexia nervosa
 when the relationship is at stake  parents perception of the relationship with a child with problematic gaming and their perceived need for support
 validation of the superbrief pathological narcissism inventory sbpni among swedish adolescents
 interplay between parental knowledge and adolescent inebriation and their links to parentchild relationships over time
 neighborhood conditions in a swedish context  two studies of reliability and validity of virtual systematic social observation using google street view
 does attending preschool in an economically advantaged or disadvantaged neighborhood moderate the effects of the preschool edition of promoting alternative thinking strategies?
 the intertwined evolution of sexual harassment victimization and emotional problems among young people
 role of pubertal timing in the development of peer victimization and offending from early to midadolescence
 the role of the familys emotional climate in the links between parentadolescent communication and adolescent psychosocial functioning
 the role of relational support in the longitudinal links between adolescent sexual harassment victimization and psychological health
 differences in parents and adolescents reports on parental knowledge and longitudinal associations to adolescents psychological problems
 mutual actions  developmental links between aspects of the parentadolescent relationship and adolescent risk behaviors
 does one size fit all?  linking parenting with adolescent substance use and adolescent temperament
 structural relations between sources of parental knowledge feelings of being overly controlled and risk behaviors in early adolescence
 concussion history associated with adolescent psychological distress but not hazardous gambling  a crosssectional study
 adolescent gaming and parentchild emotional closeness  bivariate relationships in a longitudinal perspective
 in their own voices  immigrant mothers experiences and perceptions of the groupbased selfassured parents programme for parents in disadvantaged areas in sweden
 relapse prevention therapy for internet gaming disorder in swedish child and adolescent psychiatric clinics  a randomized controlled trial
 relapse prevention therapy for problem gaming or internet gaming disorder in swedish child and youth psychiatric clinics  protocol for a randomized controlled trial
 adolescents perceptions of a relapse prevention treatment for problematic gaming  a qualitative study
 study protocol for a nonrandomized controlled trial of the effects of internetbased parent training as a booster to the preschool edition of paths  universal edition of the parent web
 raising teenage children in disadvantaged neighbourhoods  the experiences and challenges of immigrant mothers in sweden
 shortterm longitudinal participation trajectories related to domestic life and peer relations for adolescents with and without selfreported neurodevelopmental impairments
 discrepancies in parents and adolescents reports on parentadolescent communication and associations to adolescents psychological health
 crosscultural examination of links between parentadolescent communication and adolescent psychological problems in 12 cultural groups.
 does one size fit all?  linking parenting wirh adolescent substgance use and adolescent temperament
 parentadolescent communication and adolescent delinquency  unraveling withinfamily processes from betweenfamily differences.
 aspects of the parentadolescent relationship and associations with adolescent risk behaviors over time
 impact of parentchild communication and adolescent interpretation of parental monitoring efforts on risk behavior in early adolescence.
 risk discourses in swedish tabloids
 immigrant parents living in deprived areas often worry about their childrens safety and future at the same time as they have difficulties facilitating the best development potential for their children. social services can help parents and their children to attain more promising developmental outcomes through focus on early preventive parenting support efforts but these efforts need to be culturally tailored for the best possible results.
 for this reason social services in the municipality of örebro developed a culturally sensitive parenting support program aimed at immigrant parents living in deprived areas who are worried that their children age 1218 engage in or will be exposed to harmful environments. the selfassured parenting program sap offers support to these parents by building on protective factors and strengthening parents in their parenting through focus on parenting competence and parentchild communication.
 the purpose of sap is to increase parents selfconfidence and communication between parents and their teenagers as well as to reduce parents worries through activities that have a clear focus on empowerment and knowledge of child development. this multidesign project aims to test the implementation and effect of tf in örebro and other swedish municipalities with similar problems through observation interviews with parents and group leadersmanagers as well as longitudinal effect measurements of parenting competence parentchild communication and worries about their childrens psychosocial development.
 the project is expected to generate an industrially validated scientific method for deployment of plug  produce resources with flexibility and efficiency in focus.
 do not fill out fun forms on social media with information about yourself
 used to build a profile about you.
 a very common way to use your information to reset your passwords.
 at least 12 characters.
 include both uppercase and lowercase letters.
 include numbers and special characters.
 use phrases with punctuation.
 by strong passwords we mean passwords longer than 12 characters combining lowercase and uppercase letters special characters and numbers. to make it easier its recommended to use phrases instead of complicated combinations of characters that you wont remember. for example its easier to remember thehorseeatsoats1 than zzk34xpg@19
 use a password manager
 have a unique password for each servicewebsite.
 there are many good free options for individuals such as bitwarden 1password or keeper.
 do not save passwords in your browser.
 its easier to remember one strong password than 50.
 it can be used for all sensitive and important things to remember.
 a password manager simplifies password management and makes it easier to use long secure passwords when all you need to remember is one strong password instead of 50 different ones. the password manager is also a useful tool for keeping track of other important information and for consolidating your accounts and passwords in case something unexpected happens allowing a family member to manage your digital identity.
 think about what you share on social media
 dont share your location.
 dont announce your vacation to everyone.
 dont share information that can be used to access your accounts.
 think before sharing information openly on social media  could this be something someone can misuse? for example if you constantly share your location its easy for potential burglars to take advantage when youre far from home. the same goes if you announce that youre going on a twoweek vacation  its very easy for someone to swing by and pick up your mail. a common example is someone ordering something in your name for delivery to your mailbox and then simply picking it up when youre not home. it can range from new bank and credit cards to expensive items or even address changes and similar if you dont have digital government mail.
 its highly unlikely that your boss is emailing you to make a bank transfer.
 if something seems too good to be true it usually is.
 always verify before taking action on an email.
 scammers always try to create a sense of urgency  be vigilant if someone wants you to act immediately. when you receive an email that seems correct but also seems to have something wrong  it could be sentence structure the sender formatting or something else thats not as it usually is  always verify before doing anything. in most cases we have a purpose for an email and can verify with the senderrecipient either through a return email or some other means. be especially cautious when it comes to financial commitments scammers often try to create a sense that something must happen immediately so that youll act without a thorough investigation.
 update programs and apps as soon as an update is available.
 attackers often exploit vulnerabilities in old versions.
 use antivirus software
 have some form of antivirus on your computer.
 not as necessary on a mobile phone.
 memory cards.
 if you find a device on the street in a parking lot or similar be very cautious about connecting it to a computer or phone. its relatively common for devices to be placed where just one person connecting it to a computer can trigger some form of malicious software. this can range from usb drives and memory cards to devices like mobile phones.
 be aware that qr codes can lead to fake websites
 do not scan qr codes if youre not completely sure about the content.
 check the urlwebsite that the qr code leads to  most mobile devices display the link before opening it today.
 if youre walking around and see a qr code on a lamppost or somewhere that you scan to see what its about  be aware that someone may have deliberately set it up to lure people to a malicious website. a new type of scam using this is people distributing flyers about bitcoin that appear to be a lost bitcoin wallet. when a person scans the qr code they are prompted to log in which in turn gives the attacker access to that persons data instead.
 do not download attached documents from email if youre not completely sure about the content
 review attachments in another tool if possible.
 submit them to the it department if youre unsure.
 its always better to be cautious.
 attached files in emails are the most common way for hackers to gain access to an organizations network. it only takes one employee downloading a document opening it and allowing a macro to run in an excel document they believe is a quote for an attacker to take over the computer and establish a foothold in the network. a common method is for an attacker to gain control of the email of a smaller legitimate company such as a tradesman. from there they investigate which customers the tradesman has and whether theres a larger target to move on to. then an email is sent out from the legitimate tradesman containing a quote to a recurring customer. the chance is that the customer will open the quote even if they havent ordered a job and if the language in the email is a bit off  thats all thats needed.
 used to build a profile about you
 very common way to use the information about you to reset your passwords
 at least 12 characters
 numbers and special characters
 use phrases with punctuation marks
 by strong passwords is meant passwords longer than 12 characters where you mix lower and uppercase letters special characters and numbers. to make it easier phrases are advantageously used instead of complicated combinations of characters that you cannot remember. for example it is easier to remember the horseeatsoats1 than zzk34xpg@19
 there are many good free options for individuals for example bitwarden or keeper.
 do not save passwords in the browser
 easier to remember a strong password than 50.
 can be used for all things that are sensitive and important to remember.a password manager makes managing passwords easier and makes it easier to use long secure passwords when all we need to remember is one strong password instead of 50 different ones. the password manager is also a good tool for saving other things that are important to remember and a way to collect ones accounts and passwords in case something unexpected happens so for example a relative can take care of your digital identity.
 do not share your location
 dont post to everyone if youre on vacation
 do not share information that could be used to access your accounts
 think before you share information openly on social media  is this something that someone could misuse? for example if you share your location all the time its easy for potential burglars to take advantage of when youre far from home. same thing if you post that youve gone on holiday in the sun for two weeks  very easy for someone to drive by and pick up your mail. a common example is someone ordering something in your name with delivery to your mailbox and then simply picking it up when youre not at home. can be anything from new bank and credit cards to expensive goods or even address changes and the like if you dont have digital government mail.
 pay attention to emails
 it is most likely not your boss emailing and wanting to make a bank transfer
 if something seems too good to be true  it usually is
 always verify before acting on an email.
 scammers always try to create a sense of urgency  be wary if someone wants to get you to act immediately
 when you receive an email that seems correct but at the same time there is something that seems wrong  it could be sentence structure sender formatting or something else that is not what it usually is  always verify before doing anything. in the vast majority of cases we have a purpose for email and can verify with senderreceiver either through return email or some other media. be extra vigilant when it comes to financial commitments scammers often try to create the feeling that something must happen immediately  this is so that you act immediately without having time to investigate more carefully.
 update programs and apps as soon as an update is available
 often an attacker exploits vulnerabilities in old versions
 if you have a lot of programs installed on your computer or apps on your phone its important to try to keep them up to date as much as possible. the more apps and programs the greater the attack surface for a potential attacker exploiting old versions with known vulnerabilities.
 have some type of antivirus on your computer
 not as necessary on a mobile phone
 if you use a computer to any great extent  make sure you have some kind of antivirus. windows today comes with microsoft defender which is a good alternative  use it and keep it up to date. for mobile devices today the protection is so good from the start as long as you are careful with installed apps and do not install things outside the respective providers app store that you do not need additional apps to protect yourself.
 do not plug in unknown devices
 memory card
 telephones
 if you find a device in the street parking lot or similar be very careful when connecting it to a computer or phone. it is relatively common with deployed devices where it is enough for a person to plug it into a computer and some type of malicious software is launched. it can be anything from usb sticks and memory cards to devices such as mobile phones.
 be aware that qr codes can lead to fake pages
 do not scan qr codes unless you are absolutely sure of the content
 review the urlwebpage the qr code leads to  most mobiles display the link before opening today
 if youre walking around town and see a qr code on a lamppost somewhere that you scan to see what its for  be aware that it could be someone who put it up on purpose to trick people into a malicious website. a new type of scam that uses this is people who spread e.g. notes about bitcoin that appear to be some lost bitcoin wallet. when a person then scans the qr code they are prompted to log in which in turn gives the attacker access to that persons data instead.
 do not download attached documents from emails unless you are absolutely sure of their contents
 review attachments in another tool if possible
 submit to the it department if you are unsure
 always better to be careful
 email attachments are by far the most common route into organizations networks for hackers. it is enough for an employee to download a document open it and allow for example a macro to be run in an excel document that it believes is a quote for an attacker to be able to take over the computer and gain a foothold in the network. a common method is for example for an attacker to gain control of the email of a less legitimate company for example a craftsman. from there they investigate which customers the craftsman has and if there is a bigger goal to move on to. an email is then sent out from the legitimate craftsman containing a quote to a returning customer. chances are that the customer will open the quote even though they have not ordered a job and that the swedish in the email was a little bad  thats all that is required.
 about the centre
 health promotion is the process that enables individuals groups and communities to increase control over and improve their physical mental social and existential health. the salutogenic theory focuses on peoples skills abilities and resources to be able to develop health and wellbeing.
 the mission of the centre
 collaborate with the surrounding community locally regionally nationally and internationally to develop knowledge in the field of health promotion and salutogenic
 join the sustainability council and be an active party in the implementation of the universitys strategy for sustainable development
 in collaboration with other universitywide actors work for a good working environment for students
 be a reference to hr in the universitywide work with ark
 strengthen educations and independent courses with indepth knowledge in health promotion and salutogenesis by being a reference to program councils
 latest news
 save the dates and deadlines
 abstract submission opens15th of august 2022
 abstract submission ends1th of november 2022
 notification of acceptancemiddle of december 2022
 early bird closes 3rd of march 2023
 registration closes 15th of may 2023
 more information about the conference and halmstad
 the handbook of salutogenesis
 link to the handbook of salutogenesis.
 sense of coherence soc
 hildur gunnarsdotter and susanna arveklev höglundthe director responsible for the centers daily operations and has overall responsibillity for the organisation and the quality of operations.rapporteur of the scietific advisory board and president of th steering group for process and development.
 scientific advisory board
 scientific advisory board is an advisory body with responsibility for the development of the centres activities. the council consists of five external members adjunct member and rapporteur.
 professor siw tone innstrand ntnu trondeims campus
 professor bengt lindström president ntnu trondheims campus
 professor geir arild aspner ntnu trondheim campus
 professor lotta dellve university of gothenburg
 head  of department åse boman university west
 professor monica eriksson university west
 the steering group consists of internal members and has the task of supporting leaders in the development and implementation of the centres assignments.
 abb power productscomponents ludvika
 callenberg technology group ab uddevalla
 i work at the library with media and systems. i work in the library information desk.
 i lived in gothenburg before and i was looking at universities in the nearby area but i also had heard about university west and its validity in the field on engineering and it.
 why did you apply to master in it and management?
 i have a bachelors degree in software programming but i wanted to continue my education in a related field. also i felt like i needed to learn something related to it and management so i applied for this program and then i selected fullstack development as an optional course.
 i have spent much time at the library and in the computer labs everything is very comfortable and convenient. the personnel at the university especially at the service center and the international office is really friendly and helpful. they can help to solve problems even when you send them an email instead of going in person.
 i really love trollhättan and its beautiful nature. usually i go walking beside the river or spend time with my family as there are many playgrounds for children in trollhättan. the central library is an interesting place to spend time lonely or even with my child.
 im trying to find a job and im applying for a ph.d. position at university west.
 i think that the university applies much work integrated learning into the education is really useful for the future goals of finding a job or continued education.
 forskningsledareprofessor per assmodocent fredrik sunnemark  webbansvarig wilma westin lundqvist
 sunnemark f. assmo p. lundqvistwestin w.  al saad t. 2023 exploring barriers and facilitators to knowledge transfer and learning processes through a crossdepartmental collaborative project in a municipal organization. the learning organization. issn 09696474.15 june 2023
 piper l. sunnemark l. sunnemark f. assmo p. gahnström e.  dahlqvist k. 2023 bridging theory and practice through work integrated learning wil critical perspectives on the conceptualisations of wil at a university in sweden. critical studies in education.
 information om studiens resultat
 scaffolding for learning and establishing aprofessional identity  nursing students experiences ofa studentcentered supervision model
 scaffolding for learning and establishing a professional identity  a qualitative descriptive study of nursing students experiences of learning with a studentcentered supervision model based on patientoriented care during clinical placement
 collaboration for learning  how can it be done? a case study in a tested environment between a company healthcare professionals and the public in primary care
 manoeuvring between interplay and context  an ethnographic study of social interaction in encounters between registered nurses older patients and their relatives
 semistructured interviews with a sociocultural perspective  the meeting between the elderly patient and the physician in a hospital setting in sweden
 selfcare experiences of older patients with diabetes mellitus  a qualitative systematic literature review
 voices used by nurses when communicating with patients and relatives in a department of medicine for older people  an ethnographic study
 information about sexual activity after hip replacement  a literature review
 determination of the concepts profession and role in relation to nurse educator
 job demands work engagement and job turnover intentions among registered nurses  explained by workfamily private life inference
 workintegrated learning as a pedagogical tool to integrate theory andpractice in nursing education  an integrative literature revie
 striving to establish a care relationship mission possible or impossible?  triad encounters between patients relatives and nurses
 nursing and learning  healthcare pedagogics and workintegrated learning
 what are they talking about? content of the communication exchanges between nurses patients and relatives in a department of medicine for older people  an ethnographic study
 district nurses meeting with and providing care to people with mental illness in health centers  an interview study
 semistructured interviews with a sociocultural perspective  the meeting between the elderly patien and the physician in a hospital setting in sweden
 nurses experience of caring for palliativestage patients in a hospital setting in sweden
 experiences of teaching and learning with social robots
 new critical imaginaries and reflections on robots and artificial intelligence  how teachers programming knowledge could affect future educational technology
 critical imaginaries and reflections on artificial intelligence and robots in postdigital k12 education
 digital stress in hybrid organizations digistress 20242026
 leadership and coworkership in hybrid industries leadhybrid 20232026.
 leading digitalization in school leads 20202022
 teknik fördjupning expanding the content and reuse of existing repositories. kendra start with the functionservice then dive deepervem ska delta tekniker
 teknik fördjupning welcome to isla sanservervem ska delta teknikerin this workshop you will deploy a completely serverless web application built with aws services. fördjupning lambda and integrationsvem ska delta tekniker
 satyapal mahade about  sicomap
 regulations for award of sparbanksstiftelsen väst scholarship 2024
 swedbank in collaboration with the swedish foundation sparbanksstiftelsen väst has donated 40 000 kr to university west for awarding students who have completed a study or internship period abroad within their education here. the funds will be awarded as 2 scholarships of 20 000 sek each.
 university west will award these two scholarships to students who have completed a study or internship period abroad of more than 8 weeks.students in firstcycle studies bachelor level and students in secondcycle studies master level are welcome to apply.
 students who are currently studying at university west who have been abroad for study or internship during spring 2024 or are going for study or internship abroad during autum 2024 or spring 2025 and have not received any funds from university west can apply.
 the two students awarded the scholarship undertake to be present to receive this during the graduation ceremony and will be expected to give a short presentation of their experiences.
 applications must be submitted on time and contain the following in order to be regarded as complete
 a personal letter  max 2 a4 pages less is absolutely fine where the applicant describes the periodjourney in relation to the university education and the connection to workintegrated learning perspectives.
 the application in mobilityonline must be completed with relavant documentation uploaded mol is used to apply for exchange seat abroad.
 it is meritorious if the student integrates sustainability within the framework of agenda 2030 in hisher study plan abroad.
 a scholarship committee will review applications and select scholars. the committee consists of the vicechancellor student union representative and for this assignment appointed administrator.
 the scholarships are announced on this university west web page and the last date of application is 10 september 2024 but possibility to submit late applications is open until 1st october 2024.
 all applicants will be notified of the result of their application.
 town city
 telephone
 estimated time for graduation
 the period consisted of
 internship
 location country
 to be attached to the application
 a personal letter  max 2 a4 pages where the applicant describes the periodjourney in relation to the university education and the connection to workintegrated learning perspectives. the letter should identify the students ability to reflect and understand their exchangetravel from a un sustainabledevelopmentgoal perspective.
 certificate of result ladok where all completed courses or units at university west are listed.
 i have taken note of how the university handles the data collected via the form i also understand that my application will be shared with the chairperson of sparbanksstiftelsen väst and i approve the processing
 processing of personal data
 processing of personal datathe university west needs your consent for handling your personal data collected in this form.the information is needed to plan and manage the event to communicate with you and to meet any requests about food. the information will be processed by the event coordinator and will be deleted after the event.
 read more about how the university west processes your information and your rights.
 scholarship from gkn aerospace
 you as a student or employee at university west now have the opportunity to apply or nominate someone for a scholarship from gkn aerospace.
 the criteria for being considered for a nomination is that one has contributed with innovative and beneficial efforts with a clear industrial connection.
 in 2015 gkn celebrated 85 years and university west 25 years. in connection the parties instituted a new scholarship to reward special and innovative collaborative efforts. the scholarship covers sek 15000 and will be awarded annually for 10 years from 2016. after five years gkn will evaluate the scholarship and possibly adjust the purpose and criteria. the scholarship recipients names will be listed on a board in the gkn hall at university west.
 what is rewarded can be special and innovative collaborative efforts within
 project collaboration
 through their work the scholarship recipient must have achieved practical benefit that has benefited both the university and industry. it may also include companies other than gkn.
 the applicationnomination must go to registrator@hv.se and describe what the nominee has done and what the work has resulted in preferably with a reference and what further can be expected. the last date for the application is 27 november.
 decision of scholarship
 the decision on scholarship recipients is made by a scholarship committee led by the vicechancellor.
 award ceremony
 the award ceremony takes place on 7 december at the universitys vicechancellors information.
 maria derner university west 073901 33 06
 are you curious about which scholarships you can apply for at university west?
 the university wests scholarships
 gull and stellan ljungbergs foundation  a years internship at the swedish chamber of commerce in london
 please note that the scholarships below are not administered by university west. university west is also not responsible for the links below.
 cryptoholics stipendium
 the study of the u.s. institutes susi program  focus on leadership and environmental issues you must be swedish citizen
 most libraries have catalogs and summaries of which scholarships are available. an example is the book funds  scholarships in sweden published by the swedish scholarship agency.
 another tip is to go to your home municipalitys website and see if they have information about scholarships. often the scholarships are linked to where you live or where you were born. it may also be worth checking with the banks in your place of residence. banks can often manage scholarship funds but may not always market the scholarships in any way other than through a lecture. you can also contact associations such as lions and rotary. they may be willing to make a contribution to your trip in exchange for for example you giving a talk about your experiences to members afterwards.
 university wests scholarships
 read more about the travel scholarship
 read more about the scholarship
 welcome to the school of business economics and it
 information and facts about school of business economics and it.
 we offer education in business administration management marketing and accounting economics it informaticsinformation systems political science urban planning real estate and media production. there is a wide range of courses both on the undergraduate and graduate level in english focusing on more intense and deeper collaboration with preferred international partners. we have a long experience and knowledge in elearning and digital media and unique media production in 3d animation and visualisation.
 we have five underlying divisions
 division of urban planning and development
 division of real estate economics and society
 division of media and design
 division of business administration
 division of informatics
 if you have questions regarding our education please contact the head of the department fredrik sjögren
 scientific methods in robotics and automation parttime campus vtm605
 scientific work in work integrated learning parttime campus vaaf010
 the student must be admitted to a thirdcycle programme in workintegrated learning or the equivalent.
 superior corrosion performance of coatings through control of chemistry microstructure and architecture.
 scope seeks to utilize the complementary experience and expertise of partners through coproduction to address the incessant industrial demand for coatings with superior corrosion performance in harsh high temperature environments. although the focus is specifically onbiomasswastefired power plant boilers and black liquor recovery boilers blrbs the outcome will not only be of immediate use to power plants in sweden but also lay foundation for tailoring next generation corrosion resistant coatings for other high temperatureapplications.
 nibased and mcralytype coatings yielding alumina chromia and mixed aluminachromia scales and deposited by the emergent supersonic high velocity airfuel hvaf process which promises to yield coatings superior to those deposited by the current stateoftheart high velocity oxyfuel hvof technique will be investigated. different coating architectures such as monolithic layered and composite will also be studied.
 the following collaboration network of stakeholders with complementary competencies covering the entire value chain has beenestablished
 the leading thermal spray academic r d group in sweden university west högskolan väst hereafter called hv
 a global leader in functiondependent design  manufacture of high temperature materials sandvik heating technology ab sandvik
 a company with expertise in application of coatings for power plant boilers mh engineering ab mhe
 a leading developer and manufacturer of boilers gasifiers and power plants valmet
 this consortium is bolstered by collaboration between university west and the high temperature corrosion centre htc chalmers as well as a recently established linkage with university of nottingham un uk to enable the problem to be comprehensively addressed by taking it all the way to industrial qualification of coatings in complex environments.
 superior corrosion performance of coatings through control of chemistry microstructure and architecture
 scratch  surface crack detection with thermography characterisation of method
 the automotive and aerospace industry is today in need of automated nondestructive testing due to an increased demand for inspection of manufactured parts.
 one type of defect in metal structures which is of serious concern is surface breaking cracks. this type of defect is not easy to detect with all conventional methods and the nondestructive testing methods that are used today are not easily automated for several reasons.
 thermography is a relatively novel method when it comes to detecting surface cracks and a method that has been studied in recent years and has shown promising results uses high intensity light to excite the defect. this method has several advantages when it comes to automation including full frame and noncontact inspection. since this method is new it has not yet been thoroughly investigated and it is not known which parameters are the most important and how they should best be optimized. furthermore no studies have been performed in order to investigate the possibilities and limitations of the method.
 borrow a screen for students poster presentations.
 there are four screens available for loan. all of them are portable meaning they are mounted on large stands with wheels. the orientation of the screen is adjustable so you can have both horizontal or vertical display. they can also be mounted on both sides of the stand.
 the screens are managed by our media technicians. we assist in delivering them to your venue and starting them up.
 for bookings and inquiries please contact the media technicians.
 are you planning a poster session?
 feel free to prepare for the event by downloading all the posters and rotating them to the desired orientation for display. we can also assist with this prior to the event if needed.
 if you cannot find the document you are looking for please contact servicecenter@hv.se.
 keep in mind that the course start weeks are preliminary.
 a course of study presents the order in which and during which weeks courses in a programme are given.
 select organization
 vice chancellors team
 department for studies of the individual and society
 division of educational science and languages
 division of psychology pedagogy and sociology
 division of social work and social pedagogy
 division of computer engineering and computer science
 division of industrial automation
 section for health promotion and care sciences
 section for nursing  graduate level
 section for nursing  undergraduate level
 division of media production
 division of real estate economics and society
 division of library and study support
 division of educational support and development
 office of communication and international relations
 service  it
 vice chancellors office
 select title
 archivist
 education administrator
 legal officer
 project assistant
 technician
 clear fields
 securit  security culture and information technology
 security advice regarding user credentials
 the it security group at university west reminds you of the importance of not sharing your username or password. this also includes sharing login credentials to mobile apps. if you have shared your login details in any way you should immediately change your password.
 security studies fulltime campus shs100
 security studies is an interdisciplinary subject and critical for sustainable development. this course provides insights into traditional and emergent security studies perspectives and introduces the student to an overview of how globalisation has changed the character of threats to human national and transnational security. in addition to theory several empirical examples of new and nonmilitary threats to security are presented. attention is also given to how security challenges in a globalised world have changed for governments and other actors responsible for their governance.
 new security solution in zoom
 zoom has launched a new encryption for increased security in emeetings endtoend encryption e2ee
 this does not apply to the emeetings in canvas courses but can only be chosen in the emeetings that one creates oneself. this encryption option can be chosen if one wants extended privacy and data protection for the emeeting as an extra layer to reduce risks and protect sensitive meeting content. when choosing this encryption some features will be removed from the emeeting such as breakout rooms polling and the ability for users to join the emeeting before the host. to verify that the emeeting is encrypted in this way a number of different digit combinations between the meeting participants are compared.
 how to turn on encryption?
 to encrypt your emeeting choose endtoend encryption when creating it.
 how do i know if the emeeting is encrypted with e2ee?
 click on the green shield in the upper left corner of the emeeting window. if the shield has a padlock on it this indicates that the emeeting is using e2ee encryption.
 click on verify to verify that the emeeting is encrypted with e2ee encryption.
 to verify the emeetings encryption the meeting host can read this code out loud and all participants can check that their clients display the same code.
 guidelines selection process exchange studies
 critera for assessment and selection  exchange studies
 med magnus hallman sverigechef deep wind offshore
 beata a. basinska phd associate professor faculty of management and economics gdansk university of technology den 1 december 2021positive psychology interventions in organizations
 save the date
 sendfiles is a web service that makes it easy for you to send files that are too large to send by mail. in sendfiles you can send large files of up to 20.0 gb to people within and outside university west.
 you log in to sendfiles with your university west account and then you can send files. when you send a file you can choose if the recipient will receive an email message stating that a new file is available and that you want an email message when the recipient has downloaded the file.files are automatically deleted from sendfiles 14 days after you upload them so you do not need to delete anything manually.
 people outside the university can send to you
 if you are a student or employee of the university and want to ask someone outside the university to send you files you can make the process much easier for them by logging in with your university west account and then click on the request a dropoff button. this means that other persons must not identify themselves. this is making the whole process much faster for them. such a request for someone to send you a file will remain for 7 days.
 if you are not a student or an employee at the university you cannot log in but you can still send files to people at the university. click the dropoff button and then follow the instructions.
 to sendfiles  send and receive files
 sensor technology and image analysis parttime campus stb600
 the course consists of three main parts sensors image analysis and image pattern recognition.
 within sensors various concepts within optical sensors are treated as well as the functionality and properties of a number of common sensors within automation monitoring and control. examples of sensors that are treated are cameras laser distance sensors spectrometers and temperature sensors for noncontact measurement.
 in image analysis the basic properties of digital images are first addressed. after this the focus is on finding features in images using for example image segmentation. in addition to this camera calibration is also covered.
 in image pattern recognition methods based on prototype matching optimal statistical formulation and neural networks are treated.
 sensor technology parttime campus sst200
 the course covers various parts of a computerbased measurement system and the entire measurement chain from physical quantity to a measurement value in a computer. a number of sensor principles are covered together with the static and dynamic properties that describe a sensor.
 in the course you will also learn about the electronics e.g. analog to digital conversion which is needed to be able to process a sensor signal in a computer.
 an introduction to disturbances and uncertainties in measurements is also given and in connection with this basic concepts in signal processing are also discussed.
 the course concludes with the latest trends in sensor technology where we look at smart sensors among other things.
 server administration parttime campus sad400
 the course treats server administration using examples and exercises from the windows server ecosystem. content directory services active directory dns storage systems powershell and resource management. also treated are techniques for distribution redundancy replication performance and access control. during the course a larger project is carried out where a server system providing redundant services should be built.
 gna100fundamentals of network and internet technology and
 pda115personal computer technology and maintenance and
 int202internet infrastructure applications or the equivalent.
 general description of saml2 websso.
 policy for personal integrity
 the service adheres to the policy for the handling of personal data  which has been published by university west in accordance with swedish law.
 the service and limitations of service
 university west undertakes to guarantee the availability of the service in accordance with university wests requirements and expectations. the process for creation deletion and maintenance of electronic identities at university west is described in university west identity management practice statement. university west follows swamids recommendations for release of attributes based upon entity categories. university west reserves the right to change the actually released attributes having communicated such with a service provider regardless of the recommendations from swamid concerning the entity category the service provider has been placed in.
 service and support
 questions and faults regarding university west and its saml2 websso service should be directed to the following local support channels
 service disruption hv play media server
 our provider sunet of hv play has reported on tuesday morning that they are experiencing issues with the services operation and are working on a resolution.
 service och it
 supportspecialist                        teamleader servicecenter
 supportspecialist                        itsupport
 itservice
 service window 20240508
 during the evenings service window after 1630 work with hvs file server will take place. shorter disruptions in access to e.g. m and h may occur.
 charlotte arghavan shahlaei
 15001530 p englishthe student learning environment during a pendemicjosefa vega matuszczyk kristina johansson martin schuler university west
 15001530 iswedishworkintegrated second language learning wil2learning in different formal and informal domains
 linda febring university west
 fotnoti interactive session 10 minutes presentation and 20 minutes qap presentation 20 minutes presentation and 10 minutes qapo poster
 work integrated learning trough other peoples stories about their workplacesociocultuaral perspective of wil
 lennarth bernhardsson. university west
 the challenge with the skilled hobbyist
 chair10.30 11.00 p englishinternational collaboration in the new wil phd programme at university westper assmo university west
 application of work integrated learning in descriptions of practical implications a study of dissertation work within informatics with specialization in work integrated learning
 camilla gjellebæk victoria johansson and sarah samuelson university west
 chairzoomlink10.30 11.00 p englishthe challenges of using digital media for the work integrated learning wil in the business studies after the sudden outbreak of the pandemic
 sabrina luthfa university west
 content analysis on management discourse in digitalization a work in progress discussion paper
 linnea carlsson university west
 the sessions are divided into 16 themes
 sport health and bodies
 youth labour market and unemployment
 school education and segregation
 transitions and family
 risks and risktaking in everyday life
 social movements and extremism
 youth cultures and lifestyles
 virtual youth cultures
 youth migration and mobility
 gender sexuality and identity
 methods and ethics rights in youth studies
 social work with young people
 youth work
 ethnicity and racism
 spaces and styles of participation
 planned sessions
 june 15th 13.30  15.30june 16th 10.30  12.30june 16th 13.30  15.30june 17th 09.00  11.00
 the length of the each parallel session will be two hours. the suggested number of presentations in a session consisting of traditional workshop papers is 35. each presentation will last for approximately 20 minutes. a presentation should include a 15 minute talk and 5 minutes discussion. if a session includes fewer presentations than 5 each presentation will be assigned more time. each session will have a coordinator. the coordinator will be designated by the organizing committee and will be responsible for time compliance.
 all posters should be in the a0 vertical format. posters should include a title authors names and affiliations a short theoretical background hypotheses method results and conclusions. the title should reflect the content of the poster and match the abstract submission. the text should be brief throughout. any description of methods should be simple and concise. individual posters will be exhibited for one day. each poster occupies one poster board for the entire day. the author will be asked to stand by the poster 30 minutes in the morning and 30 minutes in the afternoon during the coffee breaks.
 the official language of the conference is english. both oral presentations and posters shall be in english.
 new doctoral students for 2021
 opportunities and peer support for aggression and delinquency during adolescence in nine countries.
 education and parenting in sweden
 childrens agency in parentchild teacherpupil and peer relationship contexts
 crossnational collaboration in the study of parenting and child adjustment
 children and parents  attributions attitudes and agency
 agreement in mother and father acceptancerejection warmth and hostilityrejection neglect of children across nine countries
 achieving the sustainable development goals  evidence from the longitudinal parenting across cultures project
 dyadic coping parental warmth and adolescent externalizing behavior in four countries
 physical aggression relational aggression and endorsement of reactive aggression in nine countrie  paper presented at 2015 srcd biennial meeting philadelphia usa
 parenting across cultures  parental attributions attitudes and behaviour
 parental perceptions of childrens agency  parental warmth school achievement and adjustment
 attributions and attitudes of mothers and fathers in sweden
 support group network
 om support group network
 she had to leave ukraine  is now working at university west
 the russian invasion of ukraine has affected the whole world but most of all it has affected the ukrainian people. one of them is associate professor olena yehorova. when the war started she was forced to leave her home together with her daughter to come to trollhättan. here olena now teaches at university west.
 to the left olena yehorova and her daughter mariia at university west. to the right mariia olena and fellow ukrainian katya are all volunteering to help other ukrainians arriving to sweden.
 olena yehorova is a ukrainian associate professor who before the war taught classes in political science and history at dnipro university of technology. now however since her and her daughter had to flee ukraine they now reside in trollhättan where olena teaches at university west at the school of business economics and it.
 when the invasion started olena got in touch with university west since dnipro university of technology and university west have a long history of collaborating on projects.
 the links between the universities became stronger when the war started olena explains. i saw that university west held seminars about the invasion for example. and thats when i decided to reach out to pro vice chancellor jan theliander who i had met before and ask if it was possible for me and my daughter to come to trollhättan.
 so on the 6th of march ten days after the invasion had begun olena and her daughter mariia started their long journey to get from dnipro to trollhättan. for four days they traveled by train and by plane. waiting in hour long queues to get onto trains and across borders.
 these were quite difficult days says olena. the longest queue was by the ukrainianpolish border it was 10 hours. when in poland we spent a day getting tickets to fly to sweden for the following day. so we were ready to spend the night on a train station but instead we were lucky to get to stay at a polish familys house for the night.
 during the long journey from dnipro to trollhättan olena and her daughter met many people affected by the war in one way of the other. as a way of commemorating all these human fates olena has written about some of the stories heard and seen.
 read olena yehorovas own text stories of women at war.
 when finally arriving in trollhättan olena and her daughter got settled with the help of her new colleagues at university west and the people living in trollhättan.
 i would call sweden a northern country with a warm heart says olena. im out of words. we have been warmly and thoughtfully taken care of.  besides everyone is so kind.
 as an example of the kindness they received olena tells about a colleague who brought a synth to her daughter mariia because she learned about her liking to play the piano. and about another colleague who brought books olena had mentioned being interested in without her even asking for them.
 in turn olena and mariia try to return the favor by helping other ukrainians arriving to trollhättan and the adjacent area. so after only two weeks they started volunteering.
 we are happy to be volunteers she says. we help people coming with bus we give them information help get them adjusted and to get in contact with a host family.
 political science  more important than ever
 even here in sweden olena continues to teach political science. a subject more relevant than ever as the russian invasion of ukraine rages on.
 while here in sweden i have submitted an article olena tells. i have chosen to focus on a topic that is important right now  the shift in the ukrainian public opinion on whether to be pro russia or pro west.
 the article deals with how the ukrainian people historically have been dividend into two camps  pro russia and pro west. but olena can now point to a dramatic change in public opinion since the russian invasion began. now the ukrainian people are instead leaning to the west.
 olena illustrates with a clear example.
 a friend of mine a lady from kyiv told me that she talked to a man who lived in melitopol a city in the southern parts of ukraine. he was pro russia completely says olena. he was a supporter of the russian communist course and nothing could change his opinion. but when he saw what the russian forces did he completely changed his mind and he started speaking the ukrainian language instead.
 dnipro university of technology under war conditions
 the university in dnipro where olena is a associate professor is now working under the conditions of martial law and thus with limited physical access to students and teachers to continue the educational process.
 therefore web communication platforms have been actively used instead olena explains. thanks to cyberspace the facetoface communication and participation in traditional events can be carried out online instead.
 another important task of the university in dnipro nowadays is to provide the learning process for students and teachers from the pryazovskyi technical university who have been evacuated from mariupol. they are now able to use dnipro university of technologys tools and facilities.
 in the meantime she and her daughter are grateful for being able to live in trollhättan and for olena to be able to work at the university.
 i would like to say words of gratitude to all people who helped us here in trollhättan says olena. i would like to thank all my colleagues at university west and all the other people that have helped us get adjusted here and given us all necessary things we needed. there has been a terrific support for us and thanks university west olena concludes.
 short courses as knowledge disseminators in electrical engineering
 to meet the industrys significant climate transition and the electrification of society working engineers across various sectors need to build new skills. johan tidholm is one of the participants in university wests new electrical engineering courses. these courses have been developed in collaboration with the industry to address the increased demand for competence.
 as the vehicle fleet becomes electrified the need for new expertise in electrical engineering grows among various stakeholders such as vehicle manufacturers energy producers electricity distributors and technology companies. at the same time major challenges are anticipated for the energy system as electricity demand rises sharply nondispatchable electricity production expands and electricity needs to be distributed over increasingly longer distances. university west and uppsala university are meeting this new competence need with short specially designed courses of 35 ects with good distance learning solutions.
 investing in climatesmart technology
 it was in connection with our battery initiative that i began to be curious about the new conditions for electrification and it was around that time that this course appeared at university west johan explains. it aligns perfectly with both what we are doing today and what we need to learn more about for the future.
 many of the lectures and some of the lab work have been accessible remotely but johan has also made sure to attend inperson sessions including guest lectures.
 the big advantage of this setup is that i can choose when i am on campus to make the most of the teaching time. some things are always better in person while many others are perfectly manageable remotely. its this flexibility that makes it possible to combine studies with work so effectively says johan.
 immediately applied new knowledge
 another benefit of continuing to work while studying is how naturally the new knowledge integrates into daily work.
 it made a difference right from the start johan recalls. i am already using much of what i have learned and on several levels. i see it as two boosts really. firstly ive gained deeper and broader knowledge in pure electrical theory and secondly ive also viewed familiar concepts from a new perspective a different application.
 another important reason for johans interest was the sustainability focus that permeates the course.
 there are plenty of programs focusing solely on performance but one must think bigger than that. its always a potential issue when exotic materials like rare earth metals are involved its expensive and you dont always know about working conditions in the mines for example. for our society and working life to be sustainable over time we must constantly ensure that our development does not come at the expense of other countries or regions johan adds.
 university west and uppsala university address the industrys competence needs with advancedlevel courses tailored for working engineers. the courses have been developed in close collaboration with twelve companies from various industries atlas copco gkn aerospace hitachi intel polestar svenska kraftnät tengineering vattenfall alstom swedish electromobility centre sandvik and standup for energy.
 doctor of philosophy chemical engineering
 additive manufacturing surface engineering
 i have developed a course on surface engineering which was offered during autumn 2016 under the produktion 2030
 additive manufacturing ebm posttreatment hip solution precursor plasma spraying spps suspension plasma spraying sps hybrid thermal barrier tbc coatings wear corrosion luminescent.
 shrikant joshis list of publications
 deposition characteristics and tribological performance of atmospheric plasma sprayed diamond metal matrix composite dmmc coatings
 advanced diamondreinforced metal matrix composite dmmc coatings via hvaf process  effect of particle size and nozzle characteristics on tribological properties
 development of yttriastabilized zirconia and graphene coatings obtained by suspension plasma spraying  thermal stability and influence on mechanical properties
 carbideladen coatings deposited using a handheld highvelocity airfuel hvaf spray gun
 axial plasma spraying of mixed suspensions  a case study on processing characteristics and tribological behavior of al2o3ysz coatings
 sneha goel stefan björklund nicholas curry sivakumar govindarajan urban wiklund caterina gaudiuso shrikant v. joshi
 can appropriate thermal posttreatment make defect content in asbuilt electron beam additively manufactured alloy 718 irrelevant?
 effect of posttreatments under hot isostatic pressure on microstructural characteristics of ebmbuilt alloy 718
 chlorineinduced hightemperature corrosion and erosioncorrosion of hvaf and hvofsprayed amorphous febased coatings
 cralsin nanocomposite thin films for highspeed machining applications
 cuingase2 films with branched nanorod architectures fabricated by economic and environmentally friendly pulsereverse electrodeposition route
 correlation of splat state with deposition characteristics of cold sprayed niobium coatings
 development of highperformance colssprayed nanostructured ni20cr coatings for hash environment of power plant boilers
 axial suspension plasma spraying of al2o3 coatings for superior tribological properties
 effect of pressure and temperature on densification microstructure and mechanical properties of spark plasma sintered silicon carbide processed with βsilicon carbide nanopowder and sintering additives
 deposition of novel composite coatings by suspensionpowder hybrid plasma spraying
 effect of heat treatment on mechanical properties and corrosion performance of coldsprayed tantalum coatings
 accuracy reliability and reproducibility of various mechanical test techniques  preface
 effect of spps process parameters on inflight particle generation and splat formation to achieve pure αal2o3 coatings
 application of thermal spray coatings in electrolysers for hydrogen production  advances challenges and opportunities
 a solarresponsive zinc oxide photoanode for solarphotonharvester photoelectrochemical pec cells
 asbuilt and posttreated microstructures of an electron beam melting ebm produced nickelbased superalloy
 correction to  process parameter impact on suspensionhvofsprayed cr2o3 coatings journal of thermal spray technology 2019 28 8 19331944 10.1007s11666019009407
 coatings for automotive gray cast iron brake discs  a review
 a facile approach to deposit graphenaceous composite coatings by suspension plasma spraying
 effect of different posttreatments on the microstructure of ebmbuilt alloy 718
 sneha goel magnus ahlfors fouzi bahbou shrikant v. joshi
 effect of holetransporting materials on the photovoltaic performance and stability of allambientprocessed perovskite solar cells
 effect of substrate roughness on adhesion and tribological properties of nctialnasi3n4 nanocomposite coatings deposited by cathodic arc pvd process
 coating formation by solution precursor plasma spraying and prospects for powdersolution hybrid processing
 effect of chromium and aluminum addition on anisotropic and microstructural characteristics of ball milled nanocrystalline iron
 effect of nitrogen pressure on mechanical properties of nctialnasi3n4 nanocomposite coatings deposited by cathodic arc pvd process
 an analytical approach to plasma spraying
 effect of concentration and molecular weight of polyethylenimine on zeta potential isoelectric point of nanocrystalline silicon carbide in aqueous and ethanol medium
 shv health week 2022
 during this years health week february 13rd the student union at university west offers activities to emphasize the importance of good health and health strategies during your studies.
 after a dark winter the light starts to come back and its soon time for health week this year the event will be concentrated with a strong feelgood focus during tuesday wednesday and thursday the first week in february.
 take the opportunity to join a meditation and mindfulness session and come and talk sustainable and healthy study life while meeting old and new friends. do not miss it
 read more shv health week 2022
 here you will find questions and answers about si
 what is si pass?
 how does an si pass session work?
 why should i attend si pass sessions?
 in which courses can i find si pass sessions?
 what is an si leader?
 how do i become an si leader?
 si stands for supplemental instruction  and pass for peer assisted study sessions. it is a method based on collaborative learning. the philosophy of the si method is that the exchange of ideas and thoughts will help students to understand the course content on a deeper level. the goal of supplemental instruction is therefore to help students master the course content while developing effective learning techniques critical thinking and study strategies in collaborative study sessions. these socalled si sessions are hosted by an experienced student who has participated in a training for si leaders.
 how do an si pass sessions work?
 si pass sessions are facilitated by students called si leaders who have previously excelled in the course. si offers scheduled outofclass study sessions in smaller groups where students work collaboratively by discussing readings and central terms and theories in the course. the sl leader guides the student group through the course content and helps to develop effective study strategies. it is a flexible study environment where the students have opportunity to influence the content
 si pass helps you to develop strategies and techniques to study more successfully. through discussion you get a deeper knowledge and understanding of your subject while at the same time training your abilities in critical thinking and problem solving. the main idea is to help each other and benefit of each others experiences  everybody participating in si will learn something regardless competence level.
 during the last years si pass has been offered in a variety of courses throughout the university for example in the nursing programme in different engineering programmes in programmingit and in economics. the range can vary a bit from term to term  if there are si pass sessions offered in your course you will receive information by the beginning of the course and the sessions will be included in your course schedule.
 si leader is a student who has previously taken the course and passed it. the si leader receives training in collaborative learning and leadership and leads the si sessions. sometimes there may be several si leaders on the same course.
 to become an si leader you must have passed the course you want to work on and you apply for the position for each new academic year
 si is short for supplemental instruction. the purpose of si is that the learning of a subject is enhanced when students can share thoughts and ideas with eachother.
 si meetings are given in courses which are regarded to be extra hard by the students at university west. si leaders are students in a higher class who have taken the course themselves. during the autumn there were 22 si leaders at university west from different programmes and departments.
 si is a voluntarily compliment to the ordinary lessons. if there is a si meeting in the course this is scheduled. the si leaders make the other students feel secure and motivate them to take an active part in the ordinary lessons. the si meetings increase the student throughput and the studentsgrades are also increased. our si leaders are doing a great job says titti wahlström si coordinator at university west.
 at the last autumn meeting with si coordinators and si leaders we meet the students jayanth chetan and prakruth. they all study master in advanced manufacturing engineering. they say
 we started the twoyear programme last year and we are the first si leaders. we can tell the other students about the courses a bit like being an elder brother.
 it is a good experience finding solutions on difficulties that might appear.
 this is something new for me. i can see that the other students appreciate it. you give and take. for an international student the first days are difficult so we can help and answer all kinds of questions. the can ask us about anyting
 advantages of being an si leader  from the students point of view
 develop a deeper understanding of the subject.learn a lot by teaching others
 are you interested in how an si meeting is organized?
 please contact one of the coordinators and they will tell you more
 how to become an sileader
 the student reports interest to one of the coordinators.the student takes part on the education to become an sileader  three hours three times. then the student arranges simeetings for other students and takes part in meetings with the other sileaders.
 coordinators for the sileaders are
 supplemental instruction si is a program for students who want to improve their study technique and get an additional opportunity to work with the subject together with others.
 si sessions are free voluntary and a supplement to the teaching. si sessions are organized study group opportunities that are scheduled 12 times a week in traditionally demanding courses.
 during a session you gather in smaller study groups led by an experienced student si leader who has previously attended the course and has been trained for the assignment.
 at university west we offer si sessions in a number of courses in different subjects in the departments of engineering healthcare and economics and it. if there is a session available in your course it is included in your course schedule.
 what does si session mean?
 study with other students in group
 gain a better understanding of course content
 mer information om sicomap
 satyapal mahade postdoc university west
 ana bonilla rd engineer gkn aerospace
 mohit gupta associate professor university west
 amir parsian rd engineer sandvik coromant
 adnan agic rdspecialist seco tools
 vahid hosseini assistant professor university west
 karl fahlström specialist in production technology swerim
 anders johansson industrial development dpt.  scania
 more information on sicomap
 sicomap stands for simulation and control of material affecting processes.
 reflections from participants
 robert reimers rd manager gkn aerospace
 andreas ulvagården prod. technical manager volvo ce
 final report and more information
 emergency education in sweden  implications for sustainable development through education for newly arrived students
 newly arrived migrant children in the swedish schoolsystem  challenges and opportunities in a nordic welfare state
 intersectional gender analysis in curriculum for primary teacher education in sweden
 tutoring newly arrived students in sweden  a matter of trial and error?
 teacher students voices on why to embark teacher training program
 in different worlds  religious discourses in students space in three upper secondary schools in sweden
 teacher students voices on writing
 the hot chair  negotiations on views of life and identity among upper secondary students during a drama lesson
 in different worlds  religious discourses in students space
 can you teach me a little urdu?  educators navigating linguistic diversity in pedagogic practice in swedish preschools
 examining national policy frameworks for teacher education in south africa and sweden  a critical discourse analysis approach
 liberal muslim atheist hindu and born again christian
 language training and meaningful waiting  the impact on refugees l2 identity and agency of taking an intensive language course while in asylum accommodation
 the location of religion in upper secondary schools  exploring discourses on religion
 the immigrant corner  place for identification and resistance
 have computer  will travel  a discourse analysis of a 11 initiative in upper secondary school.
 simulationbased optimisation of plcs  simbo
 the automotive industry is suffering on poor capacity utilization although the utilization of machines has been increased up to 90 the overall usage is only about 5070.
 the industrial goal is to find a useful offline optimisation method considering all complex control functions and where it is possible to directly transfer optimised process parameters from a simulation to the manufacturing plant. the results of the project will be verified and used in existing production already during the project period in collaboration with binar elektronik at an automotive tandem sheetmetal press line at volvo cars.
 simulation of automated production parttime campus sma700
 this course focuses on the simulation of logistics flows within production where we apply discrete event simulation. the course aims at increasing the understanding of how to improve production flows applying simulation to investigate and solve logistics problems. throughout the course you will build simulation models simultaneously as studying related theory. the course consists of lectures seminars and virtual modelling exercises where we build simulation models of logistics and production flows. the area of production simulation is attracting more interest as the development of technologies for industry 4.0 are moving forward.
 rbs700robotic systems i or the equivalent.
 simulations provide valuable knowledge about the metal microstructures
 additive manufacturing obviously revolutionizes the industry states chamara. engineers find opportunities that traditional production methods cannot provide.
 but additive manufacturing also calls for ways to extend materials knowledge not least in the case of alloy 718 which is one of the most widely used alloys in the gas turbine industry.
 during additive manufacturing the alloy is exposed to high temperatures and they apply to both the additive process and the post heat treatment. temperature and time are two crucial parameters for the final microstructure. and the microstructure in turn is crucial for the materials mechanical properties.
 being able to control the entire process of arriving at a final microstructure that provides the desired material properties is a challenging task chamara states. however there is no technology available today that can help us observe what actually happens to the alloy 718 microstructure when temperature changes.
 the only way to pursue such studies is reallife experiments. test rods are exposed to varying temperature conditions during varying time sequences. what happens to the microstructures is studied afterwards. but this is a time and costly method especially considering that temperatures and time sequences can vary a thousandfold.
 simulations with good precision
 my computerized simulations come with high qualitative value and good precision chamara says. they can predict which paths to take and which paths to avoid in subsequent reallife experiments.
 saves time and money
 there are no hierarchies here
 for chamara modelling has been a passion ever since his bachelors studies in sri lanka. during the time as a doctoral student his dedication has grown even greater. he came to sweden in 2012 on an internship and worked with thermal spraying. later he took his masters degree in manufacturing engineering at university west.
 i appreciate the swedish working life culture. there are no hierarchies here. you will be respected and it is no problem to talk to a professor.
 link to chamara kumaras dissertation microstructure modelling of additive manufacturing of alloy 718
 sivpro  shape inspection by vision in production
 journal of chemical education  adopting lightboard for a chemistry flipped classroom to improve technologyenhanced videos for better learner engagement
 time to acquire new knowledge?
 we offer a wide range of short courses and custom training programs designed for those who want to develop their own or their employees skills. you can also order tailored training programs that match your specific competence needs.
 choose from our extensive selection of existing free courses and programs. or contact us for custom training tailored to your specific needs.
 note that if you are an international student other courses are available for you. read more about our international available courses and programmes.
 different forms of professional development
 commissioned training
 education designed to meet the unique needs of your organization. more information can be find on the swedish web.
 courses developed in collaboration with industry.
 regular courses and programs
 a wide selection of courses and programs available in our regular offerings.
 at skördetröskan  in the kronogården neighborhood eidar offers 40 modern studio apartments built in 2017 at a convenient bus and bicycle distance from university west 2 km. all studio apartments have a private entrance kitchenette and bathroomtoilet.
 type of accommodation studio apartments with private entrance kitchenette and bathroomtoilet.
 number of studios 40
 rent 5587 sek per month
 included heating electricity water and broadband cable internet 100mbit
 bicycle parking storage room and laundry facilities available in seperate buildings
 sektionschef campus support thomas birgerson
 padlet is not just a collaboration tool but also serves excellently as a presentation tool
 padlet the popular collaborative platform for organizing ideas and sharing information has just taken a significant step forward in user experience by launching a new and eagerly awaited feature slideshow. this feature will simplify presentations and make it even easier to share content with others in a visual and engaging manner.
 the slideshow feature retains the interactivity of padlet boards. users can still click on links view images and interact with the content just as they can when using padlet as usual. slideshow presentations can be easily shared with other users making it simple to collaborate and provide feedback. users can invite colleagues or students to collaborate in realtime.
 if youre already a padlet user dont miss out on trying the new slideshow feature and take your presentation to the next level. for those of you who havent yet discovered padlet this could be a perfect opportunity to explore its features and its new slideshow mode.
 here you can sign up for your padlet account and also schedule an ict session if you need assistance in exploring padlet as a tool.
 the futures of genders and sexualities
 fil. dr cathrin wasshedegöteborgs universitetsociologiska institutionen
 a measuring method based on laser irradiation of falling metal drops including temperature and highspeed imaging is proposed to determine metal material surface tension at surface temperatures above vaporization temperature to be compared to theoretical models considering metal ion loss.
 within four years project time the theoretical and experimental tests will be conducted and combined in a theory. these methods promise new insight in the behavior and properties of metal materials at superheated surfaces. the results are valuable for many high temperature material testing and processes using lasers e.g. during welding drilling cutting or surface structuring.
 smart sensing parttime campus ssn600
 the course consists of two main parts one part on smart sensors used in robotics and automation and the other part on the signal processing of the signals from those sensors.
 the first part of the course focuses on the intrinsic and extrinsic physical sensors used for robots and automation. the dynamics of the senor the sensing principle transduction mechanism selfcalibration and io interfaces of the sensors used in robots will be analysed.
 the second part of the course focuses on state estimation and sensor fusion. the aim is to get knowledge in how to analyze sensor signals with different levels of uncertainty. these are methods widely used withing automation and robotics especially mobile autonomous robots.
 degree of bachelor of science in computer engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering or industrial engineering and management. additionally the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a minimum of 5 he credits in programming. .
 get to know the campus before the start of the semester
 the week before the start of the semester we have the event sneak start for all new students. staff and students will be on hand to answer questions and show off your new campus.
 sneak start is an event that we hold before school starts. as a new student you will have the opportunity to go on guided tours and ask all the questions you probably have about everything new then you will find a happy group with us who work at the university and our students who are ready to answer questions. in addition we take the opportunity to present various support functions so that you can manage your studies with the best conditions. our campus café centralcaféet offers a taste of its tastiest coffee accompanied by nice background music. it will be a calm and pleasant event and we want you to enjoy and feel at home with us.
 so take the opportunity to book in on one of our tours and get to know your new campus in peace and quiet booking in advance is required.available times for 2024 are wednesday and thursday 2829 august with running start times every quarter between 13.00  15.30. we also have tours in swedish held in the morning.during the tour we will make short stops where you will hear more from these support functions
 the student union and the student ombudsperson
 why join the union what it means and what benefits do i get as a student? this and much more can be answered by our union representatives
 meet students from different programs who will show you around on campus tours but who can also share some experiences of student life.
 the language resource centreakademiskt språk
 at the language resource center you can get help with academic reading with your academic writing or with oral presentations through booked supervision or by participating in lectures or workshops. maybe you want to sharpen your rhetorical skills? we are there to guide you in the right direction.
 study with disabilities
 having a disability is no obstacle to you having an interesting rewarding and exciting study time with us ask our coordinators about how it works and what help you can get. we are here for you
 whats it like at a college library? do you have to whisper or are there perhaps different surfaces for different types of needs? how do you find all your books and is there perhaps more that is good to know? our amazing librarians have answers to these and many more questions
 what choices and options are possible for you during your studies? what does the study situation look like and how do you plan in the best way? our study counsellors will guide and help you
 here you will find new and used books compendiums and other course literature. we also sell office supplies at student prices. gregarts can also help sell your used textbooks.
 the student health service is there for you as a student at university west. you can turn to them for support in questions or difficulties related to your situation as a student or for help with things that may affect your studies. during sneak start we are on site if you are curious.
 of course we are open and here you can fix some practical things before the start of the semester and ask questions to it about the systems you will encounter. youll find us at the entrance opposite restaurant västan.
 the student ombudsperson
 registrationwelcome emailmy account
 connect student email to your own email
 student start page here you will find links to most things
 my files click h
 canvas canvas.hv.seabout ladok   book a group study room
 library about course literature   about si passports educational guidance about studying abroad the greenhouse student health care service center email questions to servicecenter@hv.se if you are unsure of where your question is going send it to the service center and it will always end up in the right place in the endspråkvingenstudying with a disability
 engage yourself in the universitys activities even before your studies have officially begun
 welcome to university west in advance.
 as a new student at the university we would like to give you the opportunity to guest post on our social media accounts.
 its a way for you to be able to engage yourself in the universitys activities even before your studies have officially begun
 the purpose is to showcase the diversity of our students coming from all over the world to study in sweden. we also think that it would be a fun way for other students to be able to get to know their fellow studentstobe before school starts.
 if you have any questions please dont hesitate to get in touch. you can reach us at international@hv.se
 it could be one or a few pictures per post or a short video with accompanying text see below for suggestions for subjects you could post about.
 the text should be in english.
 you have until the 25th of november to register. following your registration youll get an email with more detailed information.
 after you register you have until the 10th of december to create posts and send us your posts imagesvideos and text. well then post them on or social medias before the semester starts. your posts till be posted consecutively during a whole week.
 the first post should be a post where you introduce yourself. whats your name where do you live country and city what do you do and so forth. you can see the examples below for some inspiration.
 examples of subjects you could post about
 where you live
 what you do in your free time
 your favorite place where you live
 your family
 your favorite foodplace to eat
 nature where you live
 you could also talk about
 what you look forward to the most with studying in swedentrollhättan
 what do you hope to get out of your studies?
 what are your future dreams?
 will you miss something?
 your preconceived notions of sweden
 what are you the most nervous about?
 feel free to come up with your own subjects and photos
 here you can see some examples of the kind of posts you could contribute with
 registration please register before 25th of november.
 your full name
 what programme are you admitted to?
 where are you from? country and city
 social orientation in virtual reality opportunities and challenges
 the project encompasses an eightmonthlong pilot study exploring the possibilities and challenges of designing and extending civic orientation for newcomers in sweden into an immersive learning experience in virtual reality vr.
 a chance to visit trollhättans beautiful waterfall at 7pmthe trollhättan waterfalls are unique. they are a spectacular experience as 300 000 litres of water per second rush by. the best place to enjoy this view is from oscarsbron the oscars bridge.
 we will meet up in the reception of scandic hotel swania at 6.30pm for a walk to the waterfalls.
 welcome reception on campus at 6pm8pm bring a warm sweater or a jacket as we plan on beeing outdoors.
 banquet dinner at alberts hotell and restaurant at 7.30pm.this is a beautiful restaurant located on a hill with a spectacular view over trollhättan city. the restaurant is only a 15 minutes walk from the university.
 useful information
 dive into a world of global perspectives innovation sustainability and inclusivity where youll gain the skills and knowledge to make a lasting impact on our everchanging society. apply to a programme within social science at university west and unlock a future filled with endless possibilities.
 leadership in digitalised organisations
 are you active curious and have a drive for change? in this masters programme youll learn to lead develop and organise digital change within business and industry.
 are you a creative thinker who wants to build a more sustainable world? in this masters programme youll get the skills to innovative solutions in sustainability.
 policies and political decisions form and influence the world we live in. this masters programme develops new perspectives of how knowledge influence society.
 i work with targeted study support för students and doctoral students with disabilities at the department of health sciences. employees at university west can also contact me regarding questions about targeted study support.
 another part of my work concerns academic study support where i meet and help students with for example studying skills and time management.
 in addition to this i am also a contact person for questions concerning talking books.
 the cooperation team for the department of health sciences
 software analysis and design parttime campus adp700
 this course on software analysis and design can be divided into a theoretical and practical segment. in the theoretical segment the lectures cover essential topics including software processes architectural design software patterns implementation and software evolution. through engaging lectures and interactive sessions students will gain a profound understanding of these foundational principles.
 the practical part of the course is designed to bridge theory with realworld application. the students will form development teams and collaborate on a project that require them to apply relevant methods and tools for design implementation documentation and planning.
 krh600requirements engineering 75 he credits or the equivalent.
 software engineering parttime campus sep400
 this course is a classical software engineering course with a theoretical and a practical part. the theory and lectures cover themes such as software processes agile methods requirements engineering architectural design implementation verification and validation and software evolution.
 opb200objectoriented programming with c and
 ogl202operating systems with gnulinux or the equivalent.
 software and it
 immerse yourself in a world of endless possibilities where youll master cuttingedge skills shaping the digital future. join us at university west and embark on a journey to accelerate your career in the dynamic world of information technology.
 cybersecurity
 are you looking for a challenging and rewarding career  with huge growth potential? this masters programme has a broad scope and is aligned with nist standards.
 the aftermath of silencing the trauma  a narrative case study
 soly erlandsson nicolas dauman
 liberating parents from guilt  a grounded theory study of parents internet communities for the recognition of adhd
 does a musical mother tongue influence cry melodies?  a comparative study of swedish and german newborns
 exploring tinnitusinduced disablement by persistent frustration in aging individuals  a grounded theory study
 challenging the adhd consensus
 soly erlandsson elisabeth punzi
 soly erlandsson margareta bohlin nicolas dauman astrid olsson
 habituation theories in current models of chronic tinnitus evidence and criticism
 nicolas dauman soly erlandsson sven g. carlsson
 risks and music  patterns among young women and men in sweden
 reactions to tinnitus
 a longitudinal study investigating the contribution of mental illness in chronic tinnitus patients
 selfreported tinnitus and noise sensitivity among adolescents in sweden
 stephen e. widén soly erlandsson
 cultural and social perspectives on attitudes noise and risk behavior in children and young adults
 soly erlandsson a holmes stephen e. widén margareta bohlin
 risk perception in musical settings  a qualitative study
 diagnostic criteria for somatosensory tinnitus  a delphi process and facetoface meeting to establish consensus.
 sarah michiels tanit ganz sanchez yahav oron annick gilles haúla f haider soly erlandsson karl bechter veronika vielsmeier eberhard biesinger euicheol nam jeanne oiticica ítalo roberto t de medeiros carina bezerra rocha berthold langguth paul van de heyning willem de hertogh deborah a hall
 habituation models  can tinnitus be compared to anexternal sound?
 the construction of meaning through psychotherapy  a tinnitus case story
 nicolas dauman soly erlandsson
 categorization of tinnitus in view of history and medical discourse
 soly erlandsson nicholas dauman
 learning from tinnitus patients narratives  a case study in the psychodynamic approach
 the effects of noise attitudes and risk taking on children and young adults.
 perceived hearing status and attitudes toward noise in young adults
 alice e. holmes stephen. e. wideén soly erlandsson courtney l. carver lori l. white
 the impact of perceived tinnitus severity on healthrelated quality of life with aspects of gender.
 hearing use of hearing protection and attitudes towards noise among young american adults
 reported hearing protection use in young adults from sweden and the usa  effects of attitude and gender
 stephen e. widén a. e. holmes soly erlandsson
 the influence of socioeconomic status on adolescent attitude to social noise and hearing protection
 benefits from group psychotherapy in the treatment of severe refractory tinnitus
 some operational disruptions in hybrid classrooms
 we are currently experiencing some operational disruptions in our hybrid classrooms due to security updates we implemented on friday.
 if you are in a room and need assistance please contact campus support at 0520223550 or email servicecenter@hv.se
 sorry for the mess... we are developing campus
 sorry for the mess...
 ... we are developing campus the first step was the development of the area around the main entrance and restaurant västan. and now it continues. here you can read more about whats happening on campus.
 we are devloping to create more creative and inspiring environments for students. for example new group rooms and other study areas and apartments on campus grounds.
 the corridor between the automation lab and restaurant västan will open.
 on monday june 3 the corridors g and h floor 24 will close. this also includes the student canteen hälsingland h4 and the group study rooms g247 h229 h230 h309 h338a h338b h433a och h112.
 the lockers in the gh corridors will be removed therefore they must be emptied by april 30th. anything left in the lockers after that will be thrown away. there are more lockers available in corridors i and j.
 as of may 1 the canteen bottenhavet b0 closes for students. see where you can find other lunch rooms.
 the corridor between the automation lab and restaurant västan will close. this means that the group study rooms d103b d103c and d134 no longer can be booked.
 the relaxation room in d308 is closed. a new room will open april 22.
 the group study room h343 will no longer be available for students.
 student health service is changing location. for questions or to book an appointment contact studenthalsan@hv.se
 late registration for exams is now done in the g2 corridor.
 the canteen halland h2 and the study landscape h234 are now closed to students.
 find and book available rooms
 canteens and other facilities
 find facilities for students
 about the campus development
 read more about the renovations
 sourabhs master degree broadens competence at tooltec
 tooltec in trollhättan uses strategic recruiting to grow on the market. 24 year old sourabh bhoje from india adds new thinking and knowledge through his fresh master degree from university west. at the same time the company makes considerable inservice training efforts to further improve the skills of its operators.
 finding production engineers and cnc operators has been an issue for tooltec for quite a while. but competition is fierce. the recruitment of sourabh bhoje is a new method that perfectly fits the companys recruiting strategy.
 we seek a good mix of competences and ages in our team. our coworkers need to have broad knowledge seeing that they are part of the entire production process and take great responsibilities explains anton milesic karlsson manager of production technology at tooltec.
 with his academic education sourabh conveys knowledge and new ways of thinking to our production states company manager claes haraldsson.
 he completes the team in a good way. even though we have many skilled and experienced engineers we continuously need to add new competence to meet the demands of future assignments.
 machinery introduction
 sourabh bhoje started working at tooltec in january 2018 and began by learning the companys advanced machinery and the overall production processes. tooltec manufactures highquality components for aircraft engines satellite platforms gas turbines wind turbines and a number of other finished products. the company is specialized in working with advanced materials by means of turning milling drilling and electrospark machining.  tooltec is one of only a few companies in sweden that has obtained the as9100 certification required to be an aerospace industry component supplier. among tooltecs clients companies like gkn aerospace and ruag space are found.
 an easy choice for sourabh
 sourabh bhoje moved from his hometown kolhapur in india to trollhättan in 2016. he had heard many good things about sweden. he decided to add the production technology master program at university west to the engineering education that he already had.
 i looked at several educations in germany and sweden and chose university west because they have a clear direction towards work integrated learning.
 to me it was an easy choice to stay in sweden and seek employment here. swedish technological companies are among the best in the world in terms of using advanced technology. what tempts me is to meet greater challenges and therefore i am very happy about my work at tooltec.
 enjoys variety and colleagues
 no doubt sourabh enjoys his tasks and colleagues at tooltec. he feels that he is well looked after and he puts a lot of effort into learning swedish.
 my tasks vary a lot thanks to tooltecs wide production range. counting employees it may be a small company but it is certainly large in terms of technology level and advanced products.
 plans for growth
 we plan for organic growth and to increase our turnover from 100 to 150 million sek over the next five years says claes haraldsson. that step requires both inservice training of existing personnel as well as recruiting. we will probably see more engineers with university education here in the future.
 most of the companys 60 employees are cnc operators. they have gradually added new competence as tooltec has obtained new orders and expanded its machinery.
 the prodexcourses at university west have been of great use to us. they have made it possible for our coworkers to enhance their production technology competence. its an advantage that the production technology center is located so close to us states anton milesic karlsson.
 by welcoming trainee students from senior high school as well as coopstudents from university west we find more opportunities to add new competence for the future.
 create innovative ways to approach internationalization  utilize the power of digital tools in international collaboration
 the aim of the project is to strengthen the regional business community through strategic cooperation in additive manufacturing between the space industry and the university west.
 the swedish aerospace industry has been successful for many years but international competition is increasing through enhanced opportunities for localized production. therefore in order to maintain a leading position in the manufacturing industry of transport and space industry leading worldclass technology development and quality is absolutely crucial.
 the overall objective of the project is to increase the technology and supply capabilities of the regions smes through knowledge transfer enabling them to deliver to hightech large companies and become attractive as partners in international projects.
 increase the knowledge in west sweden about am and its possible space applications as well as its challenges and opportunities
 strengthen regional cooperation between industry academia and public actors by establishing a longterm sustainable interoperability structure in additive manufacturing for space applications
 increase the exchange between space technology and other industrial activities in the region for increased competitiveness and growth
 increase the participation of west sweden smes in national and european space programs
 catalyst transfer of knowledge between academia major companies gkn and smes
 increase the benefits of west swedens space efforts through increased competitiveness of the regions enterprises
 specialist inom svetsautomation 400 yhp
 mer info om internationalisering
 lightboardstudion  h106
 spela in film i powerpoint
 thermal spray coatings for improved performance of light alloys  spraylight
 spraylight  thermal spray coatings for improved performance of light alloys
 11.0512.00 keynote från irland hybrid deidre goggin munster technological universitytitel managing transitions in irish higher education  focusing on recognition of prior learning
 moderator victoria johansson
 on arrival day we welcome all our new international students. this is when keys and contracts for student housing can be pickedup.
 spring semester 2023there is no official arrival day due to different movein dates. we have arrival days from january 13thjanuary 31st. if you arrive after those dates please pick up your keys and contracts during the international office opening hours at the servicecenter.students will receive separate information on how to pick up their keys and rental contracts from the international office.
 international student representatives will send you more information on how to find your way to trollhättan and university west.
 please submit your arrival day information university west  arrival form hv.se.
 if you arrive before arrival days
 if you arrive in trollhättan before the arrival days you have to arrange your own accommodation hotelhostel.
 you can pick up keys and contract for your student accommodation on your movein date in the service center at university west during opening hours.
 if you arrive during the arrival days
 arriving at the airport or central station in gothenburgon the arrival days january 13thjanuary 31st international student representatives will welcome you either at gothenburg landvetter airport gothenburg central station or trollhättan station and guide you further to trollhättan and your accommodation. this is all dependent on your movein the student representative who is paired with you will contact you on how to meet you.
 arriving outside opening hours if you arrive in trollhättan outside opening hours on the arrival days you have to arrange your own accommodation hotelhostel.
 if you arrive after the arrival days
 if you arrive after the arrival days february 1st and later you can pick up your keys and contracts for your student accommodation in the servicecenter at university west during international office opening hours.
 bus connections from servicecenter to student accommodationtickets for the buses can be paid by card directly on the bus no cash accepted but you can also buy a bus card which you can charge with cash to make the journeys a bit cheaper or get to cover a certain period or area at a fixed cost. you buy these at any shop with the västtrafik logo but most common ones are hemmakväll at the main town square in trollhättan or at the train station tidpunkten.
 welcome to  the swedish production symposium  2024
 the overall theme of the conference is sustainable production through advanced manufacturing intelligent automation and work integrated learning. the topics are
 sustainable manufacturing
 smart production and automation
 digitalization for efficient product realization
 industrial transformation for sustainability
 we invite authors to submit original scientific work or descriptions of industrial applications. find more information on our conference web sps2024.se
 university west will be hosting the swedish production symposium 2024. the university is located in the city of trollhättan which is beautifully located along the göta river. trollhättan has a rich history of industry and innovation and is today home to many large medium and small manufacturing companies.
 conference web
 all you need to know about sps2024 you will find on our conference web sps2024.se
 if you have any questions please send an email to sps2024@hv.se
 swedish production symposium sps is a biyearly conference primarily organized by the swedish production academy spa.
 organized by
 hosted by
 supported by
 spss med tilläggsmoduler advanced regression tables trends categories conjoint exact tests missing value analysis och maps
 spss statistics
 the spss software and associated modules may be installed by students on private computers and by staff on work computers and private computers in accordance with the university west agreement.
 software included in the agreement
 spss with additional modules advanced regression tables trends categories conjoint exact tests missing value analysis and maps
 we offer in the current situation spss the top item in the list above.
 download and install
 follow the installation guides below. you will find the license key in the installation guides. you log in with your uw account.
 guide for installation of spss on pc
 spss for pc
 you download the software to your computer via the link below.spss statistics  pcdouble click spsssc_29.0.2_mp_ml.exe.
 choose next.
 choose i accept the terms and click next.
 choose yes and then next.
 choose install.
 the installation starts.
 wait until this image pops up. check start spss statistics 29 license and then click finish.
 if everything works it looks like the picture below. if it does not work start the application ibm spss statistics 29 license authorization wizard.
 choose authorized user license and then click next.
 click here to open the document with the license codeenter the licens code and click next.
 the image below confirms that everything is ok  click next.
 if it does not work there may be a firewall in the computer that does not accept the communication. then temporarily turn off the firewall and try again.
 the next image confirms which modules that have been installed and when the license expires. finally click on finish.
 guide for installation of spss on mac
 spss for mac
 soon there will be a new installation guide here
 please note you cannot install spss on a too old version of mac os
 you download the software to your computer via the link below.spss statistics  mac
 the file will be saved on your mac in the downloads folder. click on the downloaded file spsssc_29.0.2_mac.pkg.
 click spss_statistics_installer.
 if this image pops up  choose öppna  open.
 if the image below pops up  enter the username and password you have on your mac.
 now you will authorize the license.check start spss statistics 29 license authorization  click done.
 if the image below does not appear go to the folder ibm spss statistics 29.choose the program spss statistics license authorization wizard.
 choose  authorized user license  click next.
 click here to open the document with the license code enter the licens code and click next. no image
 if everything works it looks like the picture below. then click next.if it does not work there may be a firewall in the computer that does not accept the communication. then temporarily turn off the firewall and try again.
 restart the computer
 you will find the application in the folder  ibm spss statistics 29.choose the application spssstatistics.
 staff in cisco academy
 certified instructor trainers
 instructors
 senior lecturer                        ph.d. computer science and engineering
 stars eu has launched a program of online seminars in which specialists from the various areas that are part of the alliance will present innovative projects and proposals based on science and knowledge with the potential to support regional development. stars eu for st...
 transforming regions. empowering people.
 stars eu  a futureoriented european university
 university west is part of the strategic alliance for regional transition stars eu. the alliance brings together the considerable strengths of nine longstanding complementary types of higher education institutions in an ambitious effort to reconceptualise the nature and function of a higher education institution.
 want to stay up to date with the latest news from stars eu? read the newsletter nova
 you can also find more information at the official stars eu website
 additional information
 for those who study at university west
 meet the people who work with stars eu at university west
 learn more about the stars eu alliance
 whats on within stars eu
 the stars eu office at university west
 senior lecturer                        senior advisor strategic internationalisation
 stars eu kickoff conference 2023
 stars eu kickoff conference
 welcome to sweden the city of trollhättan and university west for the stars eu kickoff conference december 46 2023. join us at our centrally located campus for strategic discussions work sessions and networking as we begin the four year european university project.
 the conference will be the first major meeting in the alliance since stars eu was granted official european university status by the european commission. the conference will bring together representatives from all eight work packages as well as other important functions within the allliance.
 joint sessions will be mixed with breakout sessions among the different groups to allow for work meetings. the social programme will give participants several opportunities to network.
 below you can find information about the conference programme as well as practical information regarding travel and accomodation. a more detailed program will be posted here at a later stage.
 to register for the kickoff conference please click here please register by november 13 at the latest.
 december 4th
 1800  2130           informal welcome reception with dinner
 december 5th
 08.30  09.00 registration0930  1200    opening session room f131joining us via zoom? use meeting id 262 854 6705
 welcome by vice chancellor mats jägstam.
 welcome by anders carlberg regional development strategist region västra götaland.
 keynote by mikael ejdebäckdeputy vicechancellor for internationalization at the university of skövdeeui after one year. experiences and challenges from the perspective of a regional higher education institution in sweden.
 coffee break at 10.45.
 start of the kickoff by the coordinator of the alliancestars eu  current situation and actionsexpectations on the conference.practical information about work package breakout sessions.
 1200light lunch
 1300  1630breakout sessions                   including coffee break.joining us via zoom? link will be provided by your host contact.
 work package 2. room cambridge h341. host contact lena lindhé.
 work package 3. room dorpat d220. host contact urban carlén.
 work package 4. room alexandria e406. host contact gunnar peterson.
 work package 5. room oxford g228. host contact tobias ekenstam.
 work package 6. room padua j424. host contact carlfredrik miles.
 tig leaders and coleaders. room greifswald g426. host contact tbd
 steering committee only 16.3017.00. room alexandria e406. host contact gunnar peterson.
 1730  2230                             conference dinner with entertainmentbus pickup at town square drottningtorget at 17.30 sharp.
 december 6th
 09001130      breakout sessions continue                         including coffee break.
 work package 2. room sorbonne e303. host contact lena lindhé.
 work package 6. room h315. host contact carlfredrik miles.
 work package 7. room h321. host contact hanna stafhammar kjellgren.
 additional breakout meetings
 steering committee meeting. room alexandria e406. host tbd.
 seu officers. room f408. host tbd.
 seu funding experts. room f410. host tbd.
 seu communication. room tbd. host tbd.
 12.3014.00closing sessionroom f131joining us via zoom? use meeting id 262 854 6705                           closing notes by the coordinator of stars eu and summary from work package meetings.
 good bye and safe travels
 trollhättan is located 75 km north of swedens second largest city gothenburg.  address university west is centrally located in the city of trollhättan. the street address is gustava melins gata 2.
 a campus map can be found here arrival by train or bustrains and buses run regularly to trollhättan from gothenburg. the trip to the town is approximately 35 minutes by train. buses complete the trip in approximately 90 minutes. the central bus station in gothenburg nils ericson terminal is located next to the train station central station. gothenburg also has intercity rail links with stockholm copenhagen and oslo. arrival by airlandvetter airport the airport has daily flights to and from most major european cities. there is a convenient airport bus service that connects landvetter to the central station in gothenburg. buses run 24 times an hour. you can book carpooling taxi from the airport directly to accommodation in trollhättan with the company trollhättans hyrverk. trollhättan vänersborg airport the airport has frequent services to bromma airport stockholm
 scandic swania approximately a 10minute walk to university west
 hotell bele approximately a 5 to 10minute walk to university west
 clarion hotel kung oscar approximately a 5minute walk to uw
 best western hotel trollhättan approximately a 5minute walk to uw
 stars eu has launched a program of online seminars in which specialists from the various areas that are part of the alliance will present innovative projects and proposals based on science and knowledge with the potential to support regional development.
 stars eu for students  whats in it for me?
 abstract to be announced
 speaker students from the stars eu student board
 the seminar is open to everyone and no registration is necessary.
 start student tutor and robot tutee
 1. join the introduction days
 the introduction days are the official start of your studies at university west. you will receive more information about the exact programme closer to arrival. in the meanwhile you can check the information about the introduction days on our website.
 2. find your way on campus
 you can check the maps of our campus. if you have a car you can read more about how and where to park.
 watch the campus tour by the student union
 3. connect to the universitys wireless network
 we recommend our students to use our wifi eduroam. after installing eduroam you get an automatic connection to internet as soon as you come to campus and other places where eduroam is available.
 this is how it works
 video about eduroam
 4. make yourself familiar with it facilities computers software email etc.
 our itdepartment created a page with useful information about our it facilities.
 in order to access rooms at the university borrow books from the library print copy or borrow technical equipment you will need a west card västkortet in swedish.the west card is linked to your student account so the 4digit code you select when creating your student account applies also to this card. you will be able to pick up your west card at the servicecenter during the introduction days.
 read more about the west card
 video about the west card
 as the university does not accept cash you will also need to create a personal payexaccount in order to topup money on your west card and pay for your printouts.
 read more about copyingprinting and payex account
 6. examination  this is how it works
 read more about examinations and how to register.
 7. register for courses
 before the start of a new course in your program you have to register for each via ladok for students. registration opens four weeks prior to course start.
 more information on registration
 for purposes within sweden such as the migration agency you can print your own registration certificate which courses you arehave been registered on or transcript of records your resultsgrades. for purposes outside of sweden you need a signature and stamp. for this please visit servicecenter and they will issue one for you.all international exchange students will receive their transcript of records at the end of their study period approximately 3 weeks after the end of the same semester automatically.
 view and print records through ladok for students
 statistical process control and design of experiments parttime campus spf610
 quality and productivity improvements are essential elements of the overall strategic plan for most organisations. this has led to renewed interests in statistical methods for quality and process improvements. this course provides a comprehensive treatment of the major aspects of using the statistical methodology for quality control and improvement. both traditional and modern methods are presented including stateoftheart techniques for statistical process control and design of experiment. this course contains computer assignments in a close connection with the theoretical concepts given during lectures and follows with a project regarding design of experiement. it gives the necessary competences in statistics which is applied in manufacturing and other industriallyconnected engineering educations.
 degree of bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering industrial engineering or equivalent. the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of at least 15 credits of mathematics including basic knowledge of analysis linear algebra and statistics. in addition verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english b english 6 in the swedish high school or equivalent.
 responsible for the laboratory at the university west production technology center at innovatum.
 responsible for the universitys public relations strategy and involved in our external relations and cocreation efforts with business and industry the public sector and civil society. my work is often centered around workintegrated learning wil and how to communicate wil to internal and external stakeholders. i also work with press and media issues and alumni relations.
 i am passionate about what drives both university west and academia in general. my goal is to find innovative and strategic ways to communicate our why. the universitys why inspires us and helps us define and act on our role as an organization that wants to have a lasting impact on the world around us.
 friendship matters  an interview study with adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
 the challenges and opportunities incorporation workintegrated learning in online higher education
 literature review  evidencebased health outcomes and perceptions of the built environment in pediatric hospital facilities.
 improving the creation curation and discovery of open educational resources for work integrated and lifelong learning
 presenting the kludd  a shared workspace for collaboration
 exploring design patterns of shared interfaces for web collaboration
 working as an online educator  challenges when scaling up distance education
 the facial affective scale as a predictor for pain unpleasantness when children undergo immunizations
 supporting participation in online learning communities with awareness information
 designing the cloudboard  an innovative tool for collaborative elearning environments using html5
 william jobe stefan nilsson
 the asocial responselessness of unfocused interaction in computer mediated communication
 the use of virtual reality for needlerelated procedural pain and distress in children and adolescents in a paediatric oncology unit
 alternatives to supervised placements  work integrated education in action editorial board
 the development of a mhealth tool for children with longterm illness to enable personcentred communication  a codesign approach
 childrens anxiety and factors related to the covid19 pandemic  an exploratory study using the childrens anxiety questionnaire and the numerical rating scale
 supporting nomadic work and study practices in groupware design
 design patterns for visualization of user activities in a synchronous shared workspace
 utilizing emerging web standards designing a synchronous shared workspace
 relaxation and guided imagery do not reduce stress pain and unpleasantness for 11 to 12yearold girls during vaccinations
 rethinking the lms  designing for engaged collaboration
 postoperative pain assessment of children with cognitive impairments aged 418 using inrs
 learning models in online education  on the transformation from tutors to producers
 exploring the relationship between awareness information and user activities online
 a notion of presence  exploring the effects of minimalistic ation on a chat system
 the flacc behavioral scale for procedural pain assessment in children aged 516 years
 fulbright sweden   study of the u.s institutes for student leaders summer 2024
 students  do you want to contribute your story?
 it can be important for you to know that no unauthorized person will be able to identify who wrote the story or who the story is about.
 you email your story to berattelserinkl@hv.se
 stories of women at war
 a text written by ukrainian associate professor olena yehorova. before the war she taught classes in political science and history at dnipro university of technology but was forced to leave her home together with her daughter to come to trollhättan. here olena now teaches at university west. this is stories from their long journey from dnipro to trollhättan.
 the world is now witnessing the largest military escalation since world war ii  russias war against ukraine. ukrainian army in extremely difficult conditions defends own land from the invader and stands as a barrier on the way to europe.
 at the same time everyone has own history of war. for me it consists of numerous stories sometimes even episodes from the lives of people with whom fate brought together on these days  with someone for 510 minutes with others  for several hours or longer. they are read in smss from friends heard in telephone conversations and ordinary communication long hours in evacuation queues crowded ukrainian evacuation trains and comfortable polish and swedish trains felt in the most emotional moments. therefore they are united by sincerity and openness. these stories are intertwined with own thoughts some help to find the answer by translating another persons experience into ones life situation.
 tensions in society grew as western intelligence warned of impending war. but i was convinced that this was just usual russias escalation. the teachers and students who came to dnipro polytechnic on february 16 seemed to be quiet and even in high spirits. we gathered to meet with international leaders former polish president oleksandr kwasniewski and former swedish prime minister karl bildt who came to support us under the growing threat.
 on february 22 i shared my confidence in a telephone conversation with my university friend tatiana an energetic and tolerant lady excellent in everything. she teaches english to computer school students. tatiana on the contrary was very anxious and said that her students practicing the english construction i wish i were all cited the example of i wish that i didnt die. the next time i heard the same phrase was after february 24 when a familiar teen girl said with horror that she did not want to die.
 the first days of the war were over attacks on kyiv had already begun there were fires everywhere and kyivans  old and young men women and children  got united to defend their city. seeing this dedication in the news is one thing but its quite different when your very close friend a mother of three children answers your how are you? question by writing in sms we no longer react to sirens and explosions.... i am at home children and i are tearing sheets for molotov cocktails ..... tomorrow the neighbors will spin. the girls from kyiv are fantastic arent they?
 few days later migrations began mostly internal relocations. just a week ago i spoke with a cheerful neighbor elena who was confident that all wartalks are nothing but political games. about a week passed and gloomy elena came in and said that she and the child would go. to poland or further to the west? i asked. no you know we will go to our house on the border of donetsk and dnipropetrovsk regions. she gave me the keys to her apartment we hugged she left.
 very soon we started meeting internally displaced people who were escaping from places badly affected by russian aircraft and artillery. our neighbours hosted a family from kharkiv parents and an 11yearold boy whom i was rising in the elevator with for half a minute. the child held the longlegged and shabby toy and it was obvious that this together with the furry cat that the mother was carrying was a sign of home and comfort for the little one. these days in general there arose a completely different understanding of childrens toys. while standing in line in dnipro for the evacuation train i noticed that here and there the toys were sticking out of tightly packed childrens backpacks. my 16yearold daughter mariia also took three wellworn fluffy beloved toys with her. they are a part of home and accustomed life for children  even for not very little.
 in my family we decided that mariia and i would go to the west. on march 6 after standing in line for 4 hours at the train station we were able to take the train to pyatikhatki. of course we wanted to go directly to lviv but the organizers at the station redirected part of the huge people flow to other trains dispersing the huge dnieper queue. against the background of a heavy mood there happened some pleasant moments. in the queue we talked to two girls and one of them turned out to be my student from the faculty of information technology of our university whose name was kateryna. i was so glad that even after distance learning the student and the teacher recognized each other. the girl did not know where to go next. she thought about european countries or even north america.
 we lost each other with the girls at the next station. it was difficult to get into the wagon because of the large number of people. as my very close friend who left for poland with her two granddaughters the day before warned you will meet a classic familiar from movies situation of boarding an evacuation train  with pushing elbows screams. the main task here is not to lose each other with the daughter. done. the crowded train started off and people continued to settle in. everyone knew that we would get to lviv. suddenly at night there was a stop. the loudspeaker told it was vinnitsa the destination. after this it took us two more stretched in time transfers to get to lviv.
 here we stayed at valentinas a very good friend of our family place. by that time she had already sheltered her brothers family who came from eastern ukraine. in valentinas house we spent a nice evening with her relatives and had some rest from the first part of our journey.
 early in the morning we went to the lviv train station where we stood in a queue with a hope to go straight to a polish city. 5 hours later the evacuation organizers announced the opportunity to take the train to the ukrainian border checkpoint shehyni. mariia and i took a decision to accept the proposal in view of the prospective of a faster movement. in 25 hours we were approaching the place of a border crossing. on seeing the queue from afar first we rejoiced and then began looking for its end. we walked along a long human column. an awareness grew that all previous lines were just trifles. thus there began the longest in my life 10hour queue.
 what saves in such situations? communication does. we stood after young lady lilia with two children who were from kyiv. lilia was cheerful although the story of the bombing and the fact that she had to leave her eldest son in kyiv impressed us. dressed in a short coat lilia was constantly exercising to warm up and this along with her optimistic nature and humour helped us hold on. we spoke to other people. the stories were amazing. next to us there was a woman of about 70 from zaporizhzhia with grandchildren aged 3 and 7. by that time the zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant had already been attacked by russians. the woman kept calm all the time and in the conversation she simply mentioned that her grandchildren should be saved. the children were joyful and began to show their talents recited rhymes sang songs counted in english.
 even though most people had come through their troubles the large human flow behaved quite restrainedly. moreover there were humourists organizers and interesting interlocutors. among us there was a young woman who in a very loud cheerful commanding voice led the line shouting left right snuggle to the side. it rose the spirit. the volunteers regulated the flow sent women with small children to a separate faster line. thus everyone moved step by step and in the evening we approached the customs control. surreal situation was that people were allowed to cross the border not only with foreign passports but also with ordinary internal documents like birth certificates or ids.
 at about 10 pm polish customs was left behind. and polish tremendous aid engulfed us. everything was organized at an incredible level. numerous volunteers offered a variety of hot food which was very desirable because everyone was very cold and hungry. they competently provided information on how and where to go next helped to carry things gave warm clothes for children and adults hygiene items warm blankets raincoats and finally just calmed down. in our case at a certain moment in a huge crowd mariia felt lost and miserable. a polish volunteer came up to her treated her to chocolate  and what a miracle  it worked. she is very influenced by a simple human word. ... it was not only the professional logistics of the overall process but also the cordiality of every pole. i asked about the best way to get to krakow and another guy having previously clarified this said about the time of train departure helped to bring our things to the tent. my daughter and i decided to rest in a camp. we woke up at dawn because the volunteer who learned about the krakow direction called us. he remembered both the question and us and came to let us know about the changed schedule. again amazing responsibility and attention. we left the tent and saw that the queue had only increased since yesterday and joined the stream. and in half an hour we took a bus to krakow. the transport logistics was impeccable.
 our next point was swedish city of gothenburg. so on the same day we went to krakow airport for plane tickets and were able to buy them only for the next day. we decided to go back to the train station where there was a necessary infrastructure to spend the night. within a very short trip from the airport to the station we had an incredible acquaintance. at the time when most people were moving west from ukraine our compatriot beautiful and intelligent girl solomiya a journalist student at oxford university was going to ukraine. she was overwhelmed with the eagerness to tell the truth about the war to realize herself to be in the vortex of events. tremendous ukrainian girls we talked. then we wished good luck to each other and said goodbye.
 at the station we were about to set to sleep as two poles approached us. a volunteer said that a polish family was ready to take two ukrainians home for a day or two. we gladly agreed and a few minutes later found ourselves in a polish family consisting of mother father and two girls 3 and 1.5 years old. i was interested in how a beautiful and elegant young hostess took care of the children. having a lot of experience in raising girls in my big family there is exclusively girls kingdom i know that girls can be capricious. our new little ones were very disciplined. we played with them they acquainted us with new polish words on childrens toys. thats what made us feel very comfortable and it was a good rest before the next trip. thank you kind and caring polish family
 the next morning at the airport we passed the control and flew to gothenburg. from it we immediately went to the wonderful swedish city of trollhattan. it is an industrial place but despite this in any part of the city except perhaps the centre it seems that you are in the woods. each small array of buildings  residential or industrial  is surrounded by untouched nature. and very clean air.
 on the arrival we immediately established contact with ukraine. from the first messages in viber i learned that our friends 29yearold daughter spent two weeks under fire in the basement in bucha then went upstairs and found her car blownup. the girl miraculously managed to escape on another vehicle. later the world learned about what was happening in this longsuffering town in kyiv region only then i realized how lucky margarita was to flee.
 a little later i talked to valentina from kyiv a very good friend of ours. she is a courageous woman who was under bombing but her voice sounded confident. she expressed her faith in ukrainian armed forces and said that her family would remain in kyiv under any circumstances. in the conversation the lady mentioned about her distant relative from melitopol. before the war nothing could shake his faith in russian world. when he saw with his own eyes how russian soldiers were killing ukrainian civilians he changed his mind and started speaking ukrainian. and there were other stories when ones experience of war changed the attitude to the majestic russian world.
 here in sweden from the late march we began meeting ukrainians from northern part of my country. it mostly happened when we went to the migration centre to arrange our temporal residence status. once on the way to gothenburg we met a family from irpin. their house was bombed down. the big elenas family consisting of her husband mother daughter and granddaughter had nothing to do but leave. they told us that they were trying to escape under fire and unlike other people who were shot by russians they were lucky to go away and later broke to poland. there they saw that the labour market was overloaded. thus elena left her mother with her sister in poland and her family moved further north to sweden with the intention of later going to canada.
 we had already stayed in trollhätten for two weeks when we got involved in volunteering. the local community was to meet the buses with evacuated ukrainians from zaporizhzhia chernihiv lysychansk dnipro etc. thats when we had a chance to help our people to communicate with swedish host families and solve organizational matters. sometimes people wanted to share their stories. a woman from lysychansk with two children said that she had to leave her old mother in the city because the old lady didnt want to go while the enemy was advancing. thus she didnt have a choice as it was necessary to save children.
 the situations when people had to leave someone back in ukraine were rather frequent. we were most impressed by the story of yana a young woman from chernihiv region who came to sweden with her mother and 4yearold daughter. yana was on her last weeks of pregnancy. she told us that she had another sevenyearold girl left with her husbands mother in ukraine. a few days before the war the girl had been sent to her grandmothers village and soon a powerful air and artillery bombardment began. the house was destroyed. so the three of them went themselves yana with her mother and daughter yeva. it was not possible to do otherwise then.
 at the time of our conversation my daughter was talking to yeva. the phrase of a little girl with big sad eyes that their village had been completely ruined would remain in my daughters memory forever. i know that this is what we will remember and never forgive russians.
 i think that everyone has a lot of such stories from this war. my generation has not seen world war ii. but im sure everyone remembers the stories of older people in families about those times. now we have our own war experience which we our children and grandchildren will carry as a heavy burden for all our lives.
 storytelling and destination development
 possibilities and drawbacks of using storytelling as a means of developing and marketing nordic  tourism destinations. five selected nordic cases.
 the objective of this study is to scrutinize the possibilities and drawbacks of using storytelling as a means of developing and marketing nordic tourism destinations. on the basis of five selected nordic cases the study sheds light both on the ways in which storytelling is practiced and how stakeholder cooperation unfolds and seeks to determine the prerequisites for using storytelling as part of a destination development strategy. drawing on the literature on storytelling as well as theory on interorganisational relations the study develops a theoretical model which centres on four closely interrelated elements types of stakeholders involved stages of the storytelling process outcome of the storytelling process and destination development. the theoretical model serves as a central tool for the cases presented to illustrate the issues at stake.
 strategic career planning in phd education via workintegrated learning  blended intensive program bip parttime distance skfu010
 strategic career planning in phd education via workintegrated learning  blended intensive program bip 5 hp
 this international interdisciplinary blended intensive program bip course provides phd students with knowledge and competence to promote their own strategic career planning through the span of working life to promote skills of career planning related to work inside and outside of academia and in innovative entrepreneurship. those skills are essential in learning how to handle career transitions and matching of skills in the current changes in the academic labour market. both core concepts and emergent views on wil in phd education and how wil can promote career transitions and employability will be explored during the course.
 an interactive pedagogical approach is applied.
 the course is given in english and runs blended parttime week 1423.
 week 14 online course introduction 1 april
 week 20 oncampus seminars and study visits at university west trollhättan 1216 may
 week 23 online seminar day 3 june examination seminar
 all seminars are compulsory and will offer further possibilities for active networking and shared learning.
 admitted to studies at thirdcycle level
 strategic career planning in phd education via workintegrated learning parttime distance skff010
 the interdisciplinary course provides phd students with knowledge and competence to promote their own strategic career planning through the span of working life to promote skills of career planning related to work inside and outside of academia and in innovative entrepreneurship. those skills are essential in learning how to handle career transitions and matching of skills in the current changes in the academic labour market. both core concepts and emergent views on wil in phd education and how wil can promote career transitions and employability will be explored during the course.
 the course is given in english and runs online parttime week 3642.
 week 39 two hybridoncampus days at university west trollhättan 2526 september
 week 42 one online seminar day 17 october examination seminar
 carlfredrik miles grants and innovation office
 strength of materials parttime campus hfs100
 quantity units and dimensions. uniaxial stress and strain analysis due to tensilecompressive force transverse force torque bending moment or combinations thereof. eulers cracking case. basic classic fatigue. the boiler formulas. plasticity theory. tension and elongation state in a continuum.
 mek203mechanics or the equivalent.
 the strof project is about the development manufacturing and validation of two complex engine structure modules for the demonstrator engine open fan. the modules are optimized lightweight constructions that incorporate new manufacturing technology in the form of additive manufacturing 3d printing and new high temperature materials and are being developed by gkn in collaboration with smf and academia. validation to trl56 will occur in a fullscale engine test at an oem by the end of 2025 which accelerates the introduction of new environmentally friendly technology. the purpose of the project is to strengthen the competitiveness of gkn aerospace in trollhättan with smf partners by participating in an international demonstrator engine with leading oems. together we will demonstrate the new open fan engine concept at full scale for application to the next generation of mediumhaul airliners.
 as a student at university west you can benefit of the student health service if you are in need of support during difficult situations that can affect your studies and your student life.
 you are welcome to contact the student health service at university west at studenthalsan@hv.se. enter your name and phone number and we will be in touch.
 a national web portal
 at studenthälsa.se you can as a university student in sweden find tips and advice that can help you achieve a sustainable healthy student life.
 about the student health service at university west
 if you are experiencing stress worry performance anxiety depression or you are going through a separation or a crise you can contact the counsellors maria blomqvist and annette ryckenberg.
 follow student health service on canvas for more information tips and activities.
 they can offer you
 individual counselling and guidance
 the opportunity to take part in their events and guidance
 all appointments are free of charge and confidential.
 for questions or to book an appointment studenthalsan@hv.seplease email your name and phone number.
 if you are ill for a longer period it is important that you report it to your teacher and your international coordinator at your department.
 for information about health and insurance issues please visit the faq webpage.
 life habit tests external link
 what not to send
 take care not to send any sensitive information or documentation to us by email. communication with the university by email constitutes a public document.
 all data that can be linked to your person is handled in accordance to the general data protection regulation gdpr.
 read more about gdpr and how we handle your personal data at university west in swedish or visit the official eu commision gdpr website.
 information to students regarding corona
 text anna hallbergfoto andreas borg
 if you applied through university admissions
 if you have submitted an online application through  your personal identification number can be found in your acceptance information notification of selection result. the number consists of your date of birth and 4 digits starting with a letter i.e 001122t000 unless you already have a swedish personal identification number registered at university admissions. log in to your pages at  where you can find and download your notification of selection results.
 if you applied as exchange student at university west web pages
 if you are an exchange student nominated by one of our partner universities and have applied online at  you will receive your personal id information by email approximately two weeks prior to semester start.
 an exchange semester is so much more than just studying
 i will miss all the fun things weve been doing
 amanda pehrson the netherlands
 adapting to a new culture and meeting new people has taught me a lot about myself
 it will be the time of your life
 tilde staff is currently studying the international programme in politics and economics ippe at university west. she has been on an exchange semester at masaryk university in brno the secondlargest city in czech republic.
 tilde staff czech republic
 the views we saw were breathtaking
 philip mcgeough hänninen irland
 it has been a great time and definitely the most fun experience i have had...
 the people of namibia are friendly and curios thus no day can be boring
 it starts a process of critical thinking that i believe is very important
 ive developed personally and opened up opportunities to work abroad after my degree.
 borealis ab
 essity ab
 manpower ab
 student selected as a digital ambassador for study in sweden
 a student from university west gets the opportunity to share her time as an international student in sweden. on study in swedens blog we can follow her everyday student life in a series of posts. we will hear about expectations and goals as well as cultural challenges.
 nozinhle is from zimbabwe and studies a masters in robotics and automation at university west. her story tells us about the start and how she managed to establish here and you will be taken on a journey through her feelings and experiences.
 the blog is a modern approach to reach out to new students around the world. sharing personal perspectives of how it is to study in sweden makes it easy to relate and understand what reality looks like. but another important aspect is why people choose their program and what future dreams they like to accomplish.
 the main goal is to help future students to make a good choice so the investment both timewise and economically will pay off and generate a better future.
 systematic improvement work is a prerequisite for ensuring the quality of our operations. therefore the university of the west conducts surveys among students and doctoral students every year as part of the universitys quality assurance system for education.
 every year in september a beginners survey is conducted for all new program students. the questionnaire contains questions about why you chose your education and the experience of your first time as a student at högskolan väst. questions about transport and accommodation are also asked. the purpose of the survey is to increase the universitys knowledge of the reception and provide a basis for future planning.
 please see this page in swedish for the results from the latest beginner survey.
 for previous years reports please contact ragnar.hakansson@hv.se
 the student barometer was conducted in 2019 and 2020 among all program students at university west. the barometer contained questions about the students experience of the study environment support and service. if you are interested in the reports from 2019 or 2020 please contact ragnar.hakansson@hv.se
 due to a low response rate the student barometer survey has been replaced by structured dialogue with the student union regarding the study environment student support and infrastructure. a part of this is also the survey equal conditions which is carried out vt22.
 the doctoral student barometer is a survey about the physical and psychosocial study environment of doctoral students which is carried out every two years.
 for reports please see this page in swedish.
 the survey is carried out every spring and autumn among program students who are studying their last semester and aims to give a picture of the students experience of their education. the survey contains among other things questions about the design of the teaching organization and examination as well as overall satisfaction with the education program. the results are analyzed by the program councils and form one of the bases for the annual program report which analyzes strengths and areas of development in the programs.
 for the latest report please see this page in swedish.
 student union at university west
 the student union help you as a student at university west we are located on the campus area in trollhättan.
 the student unions main task is student influence.therefore the student union appoints student representatives who represent the students in the universitys various councils and committees. the student union also provides a student representative you can contact via studentombud@shv.hv.se.
 our areas of work
 the student union works politically at local regional and national levels to improve students situation.
 the student union pursues issues relating to housing public transport and study grants among other things.
 events and fairs
 the student union arranges lots of events during the year. among other things the student union arranges the inslussning every year to welcome all new students.
 the student union also arranges the labor market days inwest a fair where you students can come to make contacts with different employers
 in addition to the student union engaging in politics we also arrange large parties cozy pub nights and studentfriendly sessions for all students
 at our student pub decore the staff works completely nonprofit so we can offer prices that suit when you are a student
 union members always get free admission or a discount at the entrance.
 read more on our website
 office 365 epost m.m.
 bemannade servicecenter
 teaching from a values base partnering with students to create a healthy learning environment
 areskoug josefsson k. and lunde g.h. 2024 learning from coproducing digital courses in sexual health in higher education in norway the learning organization vol. aheadofprint no. aheadofprint.
 olsson a. k.  bernhard i. 2023. transforming doctoral education exploring industrial phd collaboration in sweden. international journal of workintegrated learning 244 523536.
 bernhard i.  olsson a. k. 2023. one foot in academia and one in worklifethe case of swedish industrial phd students. journal of workplace learning 356 506523.
 piper l. sunnemark f. assmo p.  dahlqvist k. 2023 rethinking wil for an academic discipline the model of work integrated political studies wips. cogent education. volume 10 2023  issue 1.
 gustafsson nyckel j. lander r.  thång p.o. 2020. fragmented boundary zones between theory and practice in preschool teacher education in sweden. journal of praxis in higher education 220 87112.
 rystedt h.  gustafsson j. 2013. authenticity and learning in a workplacebased educational programme i k johansson. g lassbo. and e nehls eds. inside the new university prerequisites for a contemporary knowledge production oak park il bentham ebooks. p. 6794. isbnissn 9781608057276.
 johnsson a. eklund a. l.  gustafsson nyckel j. 2024. clinical workintegrated learning in times of crises. how the covid19 pandemic has affected registered nursing students clinical learning. submittad
 hanna linderoth norge
 welcome to university west
 here youll will find information to help introduce you to life as a student at university west. being a new student can sometimes be quite overwhelming and we want to help support you in getting the most out of your stay here  academically and socially.
 study destination swedenlearn more about sweden and why its such an interesting destination for international students.read more about study destination sweden
 trollhättanget to know the home town of university west a little bit better. read more about trollhättan
 campus and facilitiesat university west you will be met by an inspiring and functional study environment with plenty of meeting and study places  the best conditions to develop in a creative and stimulating environment.read more about campus and facilities
 activities for international studentsjoin the student union for shopping at ikea or practice your swedish language skills while enjoying a typical swedish fika. heres an overview of activities for international students. read more about activities for international students
 the programme has given me the confidence i need
 alumna from sweden
 the environment at university west is really comfortable
 student from italy
 the positive reputation of university west influenced my choice
 i really like the familiar atmosphere at the university
 my first job after graduation from the masters programme
 i connected with several companies
 ptc offered substantial opportunities for networking
 alumnus from turkey
 it has given me knowledge to pass the cfa
 the programme actually has many variations
 alumnus from sweden
 to have a disability is not an obstacle for you to have an interesting rewarding and exciting study period at university west
 university west offer various support measures to students with disabilities. the need for help is assessed individually taking into account the nature of the disability and the structure of the teaching. a prerequisite for receiving support is that you can prove through a certificate investigation or diagnosis that you have a permanent disability.
 meet with the coordinators for targeted study support if you have questions about support in higher education.
 mondays and thursdays 1300  1330.
 on campus in the i2 corridor or digitally via zoom.
 in order to receive support you must have a certificate in english stating that your disability is permanent or longterm. if you have a documented disability and need targeted study support in your studies follow the link to find more information about how to apply for support.
 read more and apply at
 what is a disability?
 disability is defined as a permanent physical mental or intellectual limitation of a persons functional capacity that is a consequence of injury or illness existed at birth has arisen since then or can be excepted to arise discrimination act 2008567
 examples of disabilities
 learning support
 at university west we offer for example the following forms of learning support
 mentor support by a fellow student
 read more about our pedagogical support.
 dyslexia or other reading impairments
 for those with dyslexia or other reading difficulties tortalk is installed on all library computers which is a texttospeech program.
 tortalk is a reading tool that can read out loud all kinds of text at your computer screen. it works for all ebooks locked pdf files and text within scanned images. of course also for webpages and word processing tools. the program is free to install on your private computer.
 read more at
 the software that is installed at the computers in the resource center are
 read more about gdpr and how we handle your personal data at university west in swedish or visit the official eu commision gdpr website.
 tina hillerborn
 see you at four cu@4 hv.sefikagame
 ane qvortrup  eva lykkegaard 2022 study environment factors associated with retention in higher education higher education pedagogies 71 3764 doi 10.108023752696.2022.2072361
 alcsal active learning classroom
 here you can find links and information to sites and tools useful during your studies.
 in office 365 you need to use your username followed by @student.hv.se.for example buba0001@student.hv.se
 you password is the same as for your account.
 office 365 is a web based solution for email document handling collaboration etc.
 go to page office 365
 kronox is a web based scheduling tool that you as a student can use to filter out your own schedule.
 related
 templates for theses and essays
 admission degree educational administration system management of study administrative systems.
 create conditions for quality legal certainty and equal treatment in study administrative processes in educational administration admission and degree.
 manage develop and train in our central study administrative support systems
 staff student administration
 administrative officer education                        antagning  admissions office
 administrative officer education                        projektledare ladok up
 administrative officer education                        antagning
 administrative officer education                        systemansvarig
 administrative officer education                        antagningshandläggare
 at the unit study and academic support library and pedagogical development is the hub where pedagogical support at the university is gathered. the department shall provide ways for successful studies and learning for both students and teachers.
 the unitt is led by library manager and head of study and academic support library and educational development hanna gadd.
 the work with higher education pedagogical development for teachers in various areas to promote lifelong learning is an important component of the departments mission. here are workshops seminars courses and newsletters channels to meet as many needs as possible.
 within the framework of the department there is the project näktergalen nightingale a concept where students become mentors for children in primary and middle school. a project that focuses on the meeting between mentor and child to provide insight into society through various activities and visits at different workplaces.
 included in the unit responsibility is also university wests center for sustainability and the project increased university transition.
 university wests study counsellors can help you with study related questions  such as general questions about higher education or questions about our universitys programs courses and studies.
 the purpose of the dialogue is for you to receive counselling in order to make decisions and to plan the next step in your studies.
 you might find the answer to your question in our faq. please check it out and contact us if you need further help.
 during the summer we have limited availability. contact us via servicenter@hv.se
 the study counselors will relocate in july 2024
 due to renovations starting in july 2024 it will not be possible to meet the study counselors in
 the g corridor.
 however you are welcome to contact us via servicecenter@hv.se or 052022 30 00
 during our phone hours youll talk to one of our study counsellors. we work with different education areas so during our phone hours you might talk to a counsellor that is not affilliated with your study area. if you have specific questions related to your programmecouse we recommend you to book an appointment with the counsellor specialized within your study area. request a meeting by filling out the form at the bottom of this page.
 if you are studying a webbased distance programme and  or do not have the opportunity to visit us on campus you are welcome to contact us and we will conduct the meeting via telephone or online.
 feel free to ask us a question via the questionnaire at the bottom of this page. if your question needs a more detailed answer we will contact you to book an appointment.
 you are also welcome to book an appointment with your study and career counsellor. please use the questionnaire below.
 if you are a phd student you can contact servicecenter for counselling.
 do you have foreign study merits?
 we  also offer study guidance for individuals with a foreign secondary education diploma and  or academic studies.
 the study counsellors job is to ask questions that leads to reflection and give information that can help you make decisions. to prepare for an appointment with us think through what you want to discuss with us and have relevant information with you.
 study counsellors works with confidentiality.
 when you contact the study and career counselling we may require some personal data from you for example personal id number notes or records about what type of support you need etc. all data that can be linked to your person is handled in accordance to the general data protection regulation gdpr.
 contact us please fill out the form if you want to ask a question or make an appointment. we will get back to you as soon as possible.
 personal identity number
 study destination sweden
 learn why more and more international students find their way to universities in sweden.
 you might have read or heard a lot about sweden already the vikings scandinavia beautiful nature the nobel prize volvo and ikea in a modern sustainable country with a high living standard. maybe youve even heard about the football star zlatan ibrahimović. what you perhaps didnt know is that sweden is one of the most innovative countries in the world and that it tops the 2019 innovation union scoreboard of the european commission. and did you know that sweden has one of the best educational systems in the world and that swedes are said to be the worlds best nonnative english speakers? no wonder more and more international students find their way to sweden to study on a bachelors or masters programme that is taught in english.
 study path
 a study path presents in which order and during what weeks courses are given.
 the course start weeks are preliminary.
 study promotional activities
 sometimes as a student you may need help with various tools to support your studies. we offer lectures courses and workshops in stress management study techniques and career planning.
 see you at four cu@4  hv.sefikagametuesdays 16001700 september 3  december 17 2024
 please bring your mecenat card as proof you are a student at university west.
 university west offers various forms of support for your studies.
 do you need advice and help with your writing or want to discuss and improve your texts? welcome to the language resource centre we provide all students at the university west with guidance in academic writing in swedish and english.
 use our 3d printer laser cutter or try using virtual reality or get advice how to use argumented reality. we also have good premises for group work workshops or seminars. welcome
 more about openlab
 sisessions is given in courses which is difficult and for you who want to improve your study technique and get further opportunity to work with on the subject.
 as a high school student and want help with the math is welcome to our math dropin
 more about intize
 want help with your math? all students are welcome to our math help center.
 more about math help center
 tortalk is a software for speech synthesis that you can use to get all the text on the screen. it  spoken. it works for all ebooks looked pdf files and text on scanned images.
 more about tortalk
 active learning classroom acl
 active learning classroom acl is a concept where students sit at round tables instead of in classic seating lecture and this gives greater group dynamics and flexibility.
 more about acl
 targeted study support
 students with disabilities have the right to receive targeted study support in their studies. the aim of the support is to compensate for any limitations imposed by students disabilities in relation to the study environment.
 you can have adjustments on your examssubmissions such as for example extended time the possibility to sit in a smaller exam room etc.
 as a student you are responsible to apply for adjustment at each exam to receive the support you have been granted and wish to have.
 to apply for adjustments on your written home exam you need to contact the responsible teacherexaminer at the beginning of the course. it is up to the examinator to descide upon adjustments.
 for more information about adjustments on exams see exam.
 you can have assistance with making notes during teaching sessions and scheduled seminars. a fellow student in the same study group provides this support.
 a mentor can help you with assistance with planning and structuring your studies if you find that difficult because of your disability. the mentor is a student on university west who has experience of higher education.
 you can ask your teacher if you can get access to the lecture material in advance as reading material.
 do you have a disability that makes it challenging to read course literature? contact bibliotek@hv.se for more information and to investigate if you are eligible for a talking book account.
 speech synthesis
 the software tortalk is installed on the computers at the university. tortalk is a speech synthesis that you can use to read the text on the screen.
 read more at the tortalk webpage
 there is a resource room in the library d239 at the university. you must contact the coordinator for students with disabilities to get access. when you have accessibility you make your own bookings here
 the softwares installed on the computers in the resource room are
 if any of the softwares are not working properly report to funka@hv.se
 subproject main entrance with indoor square and restaurant
 the main entrance indoor square and restaurant are one of the priority projects in the campus development.
 when university wests campus plan 2030 was developed there were many who wanted a clear main entrance space for meetings and creativity and a cozier restaurant.
 now we have reached the finish line. our new main entrance indoor square and restaurant were inaugurated on september 14 2022.
 subject council
 for each subject at third level there is a subject council. the subject councils main task is to promote the development and quality of the subject and the education based on the needs of education at third level.
 for more information about the members of the subject council please go to the swedish version of this page.
 submit your paper through easychair by clicking here.
 cameraready submissions
 carefully read and follow the template instructions before submitting the cameraready manuscript. the templates can be found here limit 15 pages per paper.
 insert your names affiliations and orcid into the manuscript. this procedure is described in the template instruction. instructions of how to get your orcid can be found here.
 download fill out and sign digital signature is not accepted the copyright form. download the copyright form below
 sncs_proceedingspaper_desrist2024_copyrightform.docx
 upload all of the following files to easychair
 1.      the finalized cameraready manuscript as pdf file.
 2.      the response letter addressing the reviewers comments as pdf file.
 3.      the finalized cameraready manuscript as source file
 4.      the signed copyright form.
 the deadline for your cameraready submissions is march 31 2024.
 questions regarding the cameraready manuscript and the proceedings can be sent to desrist2024@hv.se
 submissions should be formatted following the springer templates.
 for all the accepted submission at least one author has to register for the conference.
 submissions should be in pdf format file extension.pdf
 all submissions must be formatted according to the springer lncs guidelines
 all paper submissions must be anonymized for doubleblind review
 title page with information about the designers
 design of the artifact e.g. problem statement use cases intended user groups description of features
 significance to practice e.g. usefulness of the artifact
 evaluation of the artifact e.g. in laboratory or field settings
 if available screencast of or link to an implementation of the artifact
 panel and workshop proposals
 introduction general description of the panel or issues to be discussed or debatedcontroversial issues and panelists positions issues that will be discussed and the names of those who will take opposing viewpoints
 structure description of timing of the session and the format of interaction among participants and with the audience
 participation statement a statement that all participants have made a commitment to attend the conference and serve on the panel if the panel is accepted
 biographies a brief description of each participants background including expertise related to the topic and views of the issues
 best paper awards
 we will award three prizes 1 the best paper of the conference 2 the best student paper and 3 the best prototype.
 authors of accepted full papers can choose whether their manuscript should be included in the lncs proceedings or not.
 submission for abstracts is now closed
 abstracts written in english shall be submitted no later than 13th of december 2015. individual abstracts include oral presentations and poster presentations see instructions below. the length of the abstracts should not exceed 300 words. notices of acceptance will be sent to all submitters 1th of february 2016.
 submission must be made in web browser internet explorer if you use pc and safari if you use mac
 for each abstract submitted the proponent must specify
 name of authors. participants are limited to 2 presenting roles as first author. this rule generally applies irrespective of the type of submission oral or poster presentation.
 affiliation of authors
 if the presentation is an oral presentation or a poster presentation
 one thematic area which best describes the contents of the contribution see below. the papers should be addressed directly to one of the sessions or to an open session if your presentation does not fit into one of the scheduled sessions. the organizing committee reserves the right to reallocate the topic when necessary.
 physical psychological and intellectual disabilities
 technologies for habilitation and rehabilitation
 review process and criteria for all submission
 all abstracts will be subjected to peerreview coordinated by the organizing committee. original work that has not been published or accepted for presentation elsewhere is preferred. the abstracts are reviewed and selected based on the relevance of the topic scientific originalitycontribution format and completeness of the paper to ensure that the conference includes a wide variety of session topics formats and speakers.
 all presenters are expected to register and pay the registration fee to attend the conference in accordance with the general registration policy. the registration will open the 15th of february and close the 15th of may 2016.
 the length of the each parallel session will be approximately two hours. the suggested number of presententations in a session consisting of traditional workshop papers is 45. each presentation will last for approximately 20 minutes. a presentation should include a 15 minute talk and 5 minutes discussion. if a session includes fewer presentations than 5 each presentation will be assigned more time. each session will have a coordinator. the coordinator will be designated by the organizing committee and will be responsible for time compliance.
 all posters should be in the a0 vertical format. posters should include a title authors names and affiliations a short theoretical background hypotheses method results and conclusions. the title should reflect the content of the poster and match the abstract submission. the text should be brief throughout. any description of methods should be simple and concise. individual posters will be exhibited for one day. each poster occupies one poster board for the entire day. the author will be asked to stand by the poster 30 minutes in the morning and 30 minutes in the afternoon information about timeperiod will be announced at a later point.
 a new feature for the autumn in canvas is that now teachers can submit assignments on behalf of students.
 when the submission deadline has passed and the submission is closed no longer can documents or files be submitted in canvas. if a teacher deems that there are valid reasons to accept a submission despite the delay the teacher can now submit the students document on behalf of the student in the course. this means that one no longer needs to extend the submission with a new datetime for the specific student anymore.
 heres what to do
 locate the submission
 find the student
 click on the table cell where the submission is missing
 click on the arrow in the table cell
 in the side panel click on submit for student.
 in speedgrader teachers can then see when it was submitted and by whom and the student can see on their side when it was submitted and by whom.
 link to the canvas guide.
 subproject collaboration and meeting places on campus
 collaboration and meeting places at campus is one of the prioritized projects in campus development.
 strategy for the subproject
 creating inspiring and productive collaboration environments on campus
 subproject collaboration and meeting places at ptc
 collaboration and meeting places at ptc is one of the prioritised projects in campus development.
 create inspiring and productive collaborative environments at production technology centre ptc.
 subproject learning environments
 learning environments are one of the prioritised projects in campus development.
 strategy for the subproject learning environments
 to create flexible and creative learning areas in physical and digital environments
 we have identified a growing need for flexibility in our learning environments in order to meet the changing needs and requirements regarding education for individuals and in working life. our future learning environment will be safe inclusive creative and contribute to successful study for more people. creation of such learning environments requires extensive commitment and participation from students and employees in the development process.
 reducing the boundaries between formal and informal learning environments
 creative and flexible learning environments involve the design of technical infrastructure premises and furniture layout in formal learning areas halls and group rooms as well as the design of informal learning environments social spaces such as libraries corridors and open areas. one way of supporting such development is to eliminate the boundaries between formal and informal learning environments. to the greatest possible extent these arenas ought to be developed into shared working environments for students teachers and partners. both formal and informal learning environments should be perceived by everyone to be safe.
 variation of learning environments
 the library as a meeting place and hub of communication
 the role of the library has been extended as a result of digitalisation. the role of the library will be reinforced in the physical environment providing a social informal learning environment in association with the support and service of formal learning environments. the library increasingly serves as a hub of communication between different information services students and teachers.
 subproject work and meeting places at campus
 subproject work and meeting places at campuswork and meeting places on campus
 work and meeting places on campus are one of the prioritised projects in campus development.
 to develop attractive flexible workspaces and meeting places a workplace where people long to be.
 university west strives to be an employer who offers an inspiring secure workplace for every employee. our workforce has increased and we envisage continued expansion. that growth will require greater flexibility in the design and layout of workspaces.
 the physical workplace is intended to be inviting and encourage a culture that ensures that everyone wants to be there. this creates conditions for creative meetings and interaction.
 through diversification and flexibility the needs of employees and departments will be met regarding both functionality and needs. workspaces need to be designed in such a way that they encourage collaboration within working units between working units and with other collaborative partners. creation of such workspaces requires both commitment and participation from employees in the development process.
 31 registered students from all around the world the majority of whom passed.
 university wests summer course on activity theory was a resounding success.
 the online course offered webinars at a set time plus recorded lectures that the students could watch at any time.
 although they had the opportunity to do both a large number of participants chose to use the virtual classrooms.
 linda febring studying for a licentiate degree in workintegrated learning agrees.
 the best thing about the course was the highly skilled lecturers and the fact that there was a lot of interaction between fellow students on the course.
 she took the course to learn more about the origin of activity theory and its application.
 as i continue working on my licentiate dissertation activity theory which i learned more about on the course will be another potential theory that i can bring in.
 jussara reis andersson studying for a phd at mid sweden university was another student who signed up for the course.
 i thought they had wonderful course leaders and lecturers who have really inspired me to use activity theory.
 kristina johansson is delighted with the huge amount of interest the course attracted.
 in june the first exam pilots took place in the digital examination project. a total of 97 aspiring students from 5 courses participated in the new b104 hall. the students took their exams using the new examination system inspera.
 the student survey conducted after the exams indicated that overall students were satisfied with both the system the hall and the procedures. the only issues raised by students were related to the rooms layout as many could see other students screens and each seat was somewhat cramped.
 project leader linda severinson believes that the project has gained valuable insights from the pilots and that they can now work further to improve and refine preexam duringexam and postexam routines as well as plan differently for renovations on the 3rd floor where an additional 100 writing spaces will be created.
 several of the invigilators present during the exams have been involved in the project and followed its progress. however using inspera requires more computer skills than traditional paperbased exams and a certain ability to guide students on the computer.
 the teachers are also satisfied with the entire process. they have saved time by being able to decipher students answers compared to poor handwriting previously through some automated grading and automatic reporting to ladok. on the negative side several teachers argue that the learning curve for inspera is somewhat steeper than they initially thought its not as intuitive as they had hoped. they found that the inspera training in canvas had been a helpful support. one teacher noticed a decline in the quality of students answers. much of this explanation could be attributed to the shorter time available and the transition from home exams to inhall exams. another teacher noted an improvement in the quality of the texts as they were more welldeveloped and both handwriting and structure were better. the transition occurred from traditional paperbased exams to digital inhall exams.
 during the fall additional pilots will be conducted in b104 using the inspera system. currently eight courses are scheduled.
 please answer questions below if you do not see the choices please try another web browser or reload the page.
 by pressing send you are agreeing to us storing your information for administrative work for this seminar. saved information will be deleted shortly after the seminar.
 company affiliation
 please fill in
 food restrictions
 other information...
 11th september 2023
 exploiting suspensions or solution precursors for varied functional applications represents a new frontier in thermal spraying and has attracted significant global interest. use of such liquid feedstock results in unique microstructural features significantly different from conventional powderderived coatings. this approach can be harnessed to develop coatings with diverse functionalities thermal barrier environment barrier wear resistant superhydrophobic biocompatible etc. relevant to industries like aerospace biomedicine energy conversion automotive etc. recent developments in thermal spray equipment and feedstock have also mitigated early productivity concerns associated with the technique.
 this event follows the success of the previous summer school on suspension  solution thermal spraying held in trollhättan in 2016 bringing together people from both academia and industry. it will include lectures from experts covering all major aspects of liquid feedstock thermal spraying ranging from fundamentals and process diagnostics to characterisation and applications. a demonstration of the versatile liquid feedstock plasma spraying equipment available at university west will also be included.
 the school will be organised the day before start of the asm thermal spray society event thermal spray of suspensions  solutions symposium  ebcs 2023 ts4e 2023 which will take place on september 1213 2023 at university west sweden. the school will have very affordable registration fees starting at 1 000 sek for students including one day on various topics related to suspension and solution thermal spraying and sps demonstration all meals part of the program course material and course certificate.
 read the 2nd summer school brochure  brochure
 who should attend
 all stakeholders students scientists engineers academicians and consultants who are associated with the field of surface engineering in any manner.
 in particular participation in the school will be of great interest to
 young scientists and students keen to learn about new developments in thermal spray processes.
 experienced thermal spray practitioners wanting to exploit advanced thermal spray methods like suspension spraying sps spps shvof etc.
 designers and consultants wishing to familiarize themselves with latest developments
 feedstock manufacturers and developers with specific focus on nanosized and submicron powders their suspensions andor solution precursors
 manufacturers and developers of thermal spray equipment and accessories spray guns solution delivery devices etc.
 topics speakers
 the host  university west
 avdelningschef                        associate professor in production technology
 summer school
 about the course
 participants are expected to contribute and be interactive online as well as offline live in seminars. the students will be examined by filing a paper digitally for further assessment by an examiner.
 notification of admission will be sent in early april.
 information about livein seminars settings
 the summer school live in seminars will be held in åstol an exotic little island on the west coast of sweden. the island of åstol is very small. because of this the participants will live in different houses spread out around the island. organizers will arrange all accommodations. lunch and dinner will be served at the restaurant or the café. the grocery store is open if you would like to buy some food for breakfast. the costs of your stay food and travel are to be paid on the island. the total cost is estimated at about 1 800 sek 2 lunches 1 dinner accommodations and travel to and from trollhättan.
 further information about åstol
 the summer school live in seminars will be held in åstol an exotic little island on the west coast of sweden. today nearly 200 people live there yearround on the island. åstol is a small but highly vibrant community with a grocery store library cafe and restaurant. the first thing one sees of åstol is a hillcrest with white houses that are almost all located in the eastwest direction. the fascinating port is situated in a unique bay that forms a natural and protected harbor. the island consists of windswept hills of the volcanic rock type amphibolite and narrow valleys where the plants have taken root. the roads leading up to the cozy buildings are narrow and carfree. on the western horizon one can see the wellknown lighthouse called pater noster and to the south carlstens fortress on marstrand. in the middle of the island you can sit down and relax in the lush park. there is also a memorial erected in memory of the deceased fishermen. other experiences are the salt bath water slide fishing and music evenings at the smokehouse. the contrasts between summer and winter is clearly visible out at sea. on a spring day you can feel the heat from south sun and hear eider males calling over the water on a summers day you can experience calm water and busy boat traffic on an autumn day you can watch windstorms and rebellious seas and on a raw cold winters day you can be entranced by smoky waters. in all it can be a balm for the soul.
 summer schools short courses
 engineering visions 2024 university west sweden 19  30 august
 2week long international intensive programme
 if you are studying at one of our engineering programmes you have the possibility to apply for the intensive programme engineering visions offering a total of 4 he hp credits  an opportunity you should not miss
 deadline for application 31 may
 dates 19.8.2024  30.8.2024location university west trollhättan swedenmore information
 suspension spraying and novel material design a key technology for radically improved properties of thermal barrier coatings.
 increased functional and environmental demands on todays gas turbines require improved thermal barrier coatings tbcs with new morphologiesmicrostructures andor made of new materials that result in improved engine efficiency and longer lifetime. a 1 increase inengine efficiency of a medium sized power plant of 300 mw would result in estimated savings of more than 2 myear in fuel costs and approximately 25 000 tyear reductions in co2 emissions so that any small improvements bring huge benefits to both endusers andenvironment.
 this project will explore a new deposition technique a new feedstock material and a new coating design for thermal protection of gas turbine components exposed to high service temperatures. yttria stabilized zirconia is extensively used as tbc material due to itsfavorable thermal and mechanical properties but has reached its limits regarding operating temperature. gadolinium zirconate is a low conductivity high temperature ceramic and a very promising new tbc material.
 this material will be sprayed using the recently introduced suspension plasma spray technique which allows spraying of nano to submicron particles. multilayered strain tolerant coatings with a large fraction of small scale porosity will thus be possible to create. it is expected that these coatings will have significantly better thermal and mechanical properties compared to stateoftheart today. the suspension plasma spray process is also expected to enable creation of high temperature strain tolerant coatings which will enable a replacement of the eb pvd process. this will dramatically reduce the production cost of tbcs.
 supericme 2.0  integrated computational materials engineering icme for superalloys 2.0
 the overall aim of this proposal is to introduce icme and computational tools based on the calphad technique for superalloys to increase the materials development rate.
 the key parts of this application are icme integrated computational materials engineering an approach to link materials models at multiple length scales calphad computer coupling of phase diagrams and thermochemistry is an international modus operandi to collect and describe the thermodynamics of a system and superalloys which are highperformance alloys designed for service at high temperature with maintained properties such as strength creep  corrosion resistance. the technical challenges faced in this application are homogenization gamma prime coarsening  interdiffusion in coatings all which will be correlated and modelled to relevant material properties. homogenization is an important aspect during casting and welding of superalloys and properties during processing and in service are critically depending on adequate measures to mitigate the consequences. gamma prime coarsening is likewise a measure of the property development during service and to maintain good mechanical properties is by understanding this process. coatings help to increase the service temperature and corrosion resistance of a superalloy and the interdiffusion between substrate coating and environment is the critical parameter for the service life. material properties such as mechanical  corrosion will be modelled correlated with metallography and implemented in the technical aspects treated. the icme and processstructurespropertiesperformance work will be disseminated as two demonstrators based on the technical work and will be presented.
 supericme 2.0  integrated computational materials engineering icme för superlegeringar 2.0
 integrated computational materials engineering icme för superlegeringar.
 the aim of this proposal is to introduce the icme methodology to swedish industry and to evaluate the power of computational tools based on the calphad technique. the computational work is supported by experimental work and metallography to validate the simulated predictions on how the microstructure has developed during solidification joining and heat treatments of superalloys.
 nibased superalloys are alloys that exhibit excellent mechanical strength and resistance to creep at high temperatures good surface stability and fatigue resistance to oxidation and hot corrosion. these kinds of alloys usually contain at least ten alloying elements with each one being added for a specific purpose. due to this complexity in chemistry it has traditionally taken a long time to optimise properties of existing alloys and to develop completely new alloys.
 thanks to computational thermodynamics and the calphad technique it is now possible to perform accurate calculations even for these very complex alloys and thereby speed up the development time substantially.
 there are two technical aims and one comprehensive aim of this feasibility study  to evaluate the feasibility of the icme approach for optimising homogenization heat treatments of nickelbase superalloys corroborated by experimental results.  to evaluate the feasibility of the icme approach on the aspects of gamma prime coarsening due to overageing during the service of superalloys.  the comprehensive aim is to outline an experimental study which is intended to be a part of a larger project to be applied for on the basis of this feasibility study. there is also a didactic aim of study in strengthening the competence on icme and calphad approaches among the participating partners.
 supply chain management  sourcing and distribution parttime campus scm700
 this course is an advanced course which builds on supply chain management concepts to focus specifically on challenges in managing sourcing and distribution issues in supply chains. sourcing issues cover both purchasing and more specifically strategic sourcing looking at supplier structures and location issues including offshoring and reshoring. distribution deals with how to reach the customer and central topics are marketing channels the use or not of intermediaries as well as transportation issues including particular challenges related to lastmile distribution in a contemporary context.
 study from a distance  how do i do it best?
 get started with your distance studies
 top tips when studying frome home
 via canvas learning platform
 canvas is the universitys learning platform and is used as an educational tool for completing courses. in canvas as a student you will always find course information schedule and literature list. more information about canvas log in etc.
 zoom is the colleges emeeting tool that is used when you want to meet others sound and picture. you can connect to zoom with both computer and tablet and mobile phone. more information about zoom how to connectcreate meetings etc.
 get access to university wests computer classrooms from anywhere
 now some of our windows computer classrooms are available remotely. this means that all students can log in and use the computers in our different computer classrooms at campus from anywhere and get access to the software you need in your course.read more about how to access a computer at campus.
 office 365 if you want to share documents and make surveys etc.
 as a student at university west you have access to office 365. here you have access to the office package which you can run directly in the cloud but it can also be downloaded to your own computer. in the office package you and your fellow students can among other things write simultaneously in a document even if you are in different places. in office 365 you can also use teams to create collaborative areas with chat storage etc.
 log in to office 365 use your hv username and password.
 learn more about how to download and install the office package on your own computer.
 software
 to facilitate your studies from home there are some software programs that you as a student have the right to install for free on your computer at home.software you can install on your computer at home.
 i have no laptop can i borrow a computer from the university?
 unfortunately the university does not have the opportunity to provide computers to students. the universitys premises such as computer rooms and libraries will be kept open with the aim of giving students space for individual work in airy environments with connection and access to computers.
 if you have questions or need help you can always contact the servicecenter by phone 052022 30 00 or by email to servicecenter@hv.se.
 top tips when studying from home
 student health has collected its best tips for completing your studies when you study from home. more information about student health and how they can help you.
 establish a routine
 try to establish a structural and sustainable routine that allows you to keep your studies going and get work done. remember to create variations in your routines to increase stimulation and avoid monotony step out and get fresh air move around reinforce your social contacts and rest.
 plan your time so that you know in advance when and what to study and make sure to rest after every study session. if you sense that it is somehow difficult use your alarm clock to remind and help you with the transitions in your planning.
 get a good start to your day
 create a routine to get the day started. get up at the same time every day refresh and get dressed get everything in order and have breakfast. why not go for a short walk or bike ride  do something you might have done if you had gone to university.
 breaks and rest are as important as the study sessions to be able to maintain focus concentration and quality in your studies. before you start your studies think through what breaks or activities might work best for you and will allow you to regain your energy. it is often helpful to take a breath of fresh air or move around a little especially when you have been sitting still and studying for a while. be curious and try new ways to get refreshed.
 you will need several shorter and a few longer breaks during the study sessions. taking breaks not only gives the brain time to sort and process what you have just written or read but it also solidify memorization. also try to find ways to take breaks that do not go beyond the planned time. remember that most of us have ended up watching several episodes of a tv series despite planning to only watch one episode.
 eating a meal or having a cup of coffee can be an excellent way to take breaks from your study sessions. it is also important to eat somewhat healthy food to be able to study well. it is quite normal that we tend to neglect what we eat especially when we are alone and did not make any plans in advance.
 try to think through what times best suits your planning and consider how you can turn meals and coffee breaks into a wholesome rest during your studies.
 contact with others
 given that you are unable to meet classmates and other students at the university you need to get creative and find other ways to have at least some social contact. for example try to talk to others via services like skype facetime or simply on the phone. as long as you all are symptomfree you can also meet with a few others outside or at someones home. take the initiative to reach out most people are in the same position as you.
 if you do not know anybody from your course try to keep in touch with other friends and your family if that is possible for you. you are going to need this more than ever.
 a good tip watch a digital lecture together with a classmate or checkin via chat or other to show that we are studying together.
 dare to take initiative to ask others in your class when you have a question or if you like to discuss something you read or wrote.
 differentiate between studying and other time
 try to plan your days so that you know when you are going to study and when you are going to have free time. it is important to have realistic goals. we tend to make unrealistic plans that we cannot really accomplish.
 it is better to have a plan that you can successfully follow than to have ambitions that you cannot accomplish. on a daily basis evaluate how it went for you and adjust your planning in the following days. by doing so you increase the chances of accomplishing your goals.
 think about where you study best. are there local places available to you where you can study?
 it can also be helpful to establish a dedicated space at home where you intend only to study and nothing else. that can be challenging for those who live in a small room nevertheless try to be creative. a useful trick is to switch on a certain light every time you study and to switch it off when you take a break or do something else. that way you signalize yourself what mode to be in. to study in bed may be tempting but it might hinder your rest at night.
 physical activity
 because lectures courses and other classes are now held remotely and many other activities are cancelled you will probably be less physically active than before. that is why you must think about how to integrate some physical activities in your day.
 taking walks cycling doing yoga at home dancing exercising outside are some options  no matter if you are on your own or with somebody else. you also need fresh air to be energetic focused and to strengthen your immune system. your body appreciates all kinds of physical activity.
 to prevent boredom and monotony you need stimulation variations and things to do other than your studies. are there things you love to do that are not just on the phone or involves screen time?
 do you enjoy baking singing painting puzzles recording movie clips knitting crocheting reading fiction or playing music? new situations can sometimes create opportunities to try new activities and maybe find a new favourite activity.
 are you feeling concerned?
 it is quite natural to feel worried or concerned when a drastic change occurs and we constantly have to rethink the decisions in our everyday life. continue doing the things that you feel good about even if it does not feel meaningful. being physically active is fundamental and often helpful.
 try to maintain your routines or create new ones that fit the situation. it is also easy for us to take in too much of the news reporting or conversations about what is happening. be observant and try to find a balance on what you hear or take in so that you do not end up distorting your perspective by only thinking black and white.
 also remember that you are always welcome to make an appointment via phone call to us at student health services.
 teaching and examination due to corona
 here you will find all kinds of student support
 when you start studying with us there are different types of student support available. we are here for you
 if you are in need of support during difficult situations that can affect your studies and your student life.
 if you need support with reading and writing academic texts or oral presentations
 university west offer various support measures to students with disabilities
 more support and service
 when you need distance studies
 systems guides and software
 course litterature encyclopedias and more
 visit the library
 for learning among professionals in healthcare and care services to have the effect that a workintegrated educational initiative aims for several factors need to interact. the individuals learning process how the education is designed and the support provided by the employer are all crucial cornerstones for successful outcomes. this is demonstrated in a new doctoral thesis from university west.
 anh truong is a doctoral student in workintegrated learning at university west currently involved in the doctoral thesis developing an educational intervention to support workintegrated learning among professionals in health and social care for individuals with intellectual disabilities in a collaborative project with the city of trollhättan. she has a background as a district nurse and has worked for many years within municipal healthcare and care services. during that time she often reflected on the complex care needs that people in nursing homes often have.
 the challenge in such departments is that staff often face complex care needs and there are no doctors directly connected. the staff may lack the knowledge required to understand and manage many complicated situations and feel that they are doing a good job. yet this is the demand placed on the care staff says anh truong.
 three parts must interact
 i relied a lot on the district nurses role and opportunities to contribute to good care quality. now that im finalizing my thesis ive concluded that while that is still the goal the path there requires a lot from many. when employees are sent on training courses it is assumed they learn things and that the work improves when they return. few studies have been done on what is learned how it is learned and what processes are needed for the new knowledge to be implemented says anh.
 considering how much money is spent on education in healthcare and other societal sectors it is relevant to examine which parameters are pivotal. how should care quality arise? what is required?
 anh used a pragmatic stepbystep process in the project where the results of one step formed the basis for the next. she collected data through surveys and analyzed it with statistical calculations. but above all she conducted individual interviews with 38 people followed by a qualitative content analysis. she discovered that there are primarily three parts that need to interactand be supportedfor a successful result.
 one must consider the individuals learning process and then ensure that the pedagogical design supports the individuals learning context and working conditions. staff find it difficult to be away from the operation for extended periods. it turned out that many found the lectures too lengthy with an overwhelming amount of text. the third part is the organizational aspect. support from the employer is incredibly important.
 how the employer prepares and motivates the staff before an educational initiative is crucial. anh truong emphasizes how demotivating it is for a participant to be told to undergo training that they do not see the point of often resulting in wasted resources.
 learning was better when participants were involved from the beginning. when they felt that they were involved early on where the employer took an interest in the specific challenges the staff experienced in their work situation the motivation to learn also increased.
 even during the training the employer needs to show their support and when the training is complete it is important to request the knowledge and engage in its implementation. anh shares that the opportunity to discuss with each other proved crucial. it is in the subsequent discussions in the group that the knowledge becomes contextspecific and made their own.
 in the setup we examined the staff conducted a number of web lectures individually. these were short lessons between 412 minutes long which they could watch at their leisure and then reflect on. after a couple of weeks time was set aside for group reflections. with support in the reflection questions exciting discussions arose where they began to question their previous processes and working methods based on the new knowledge. in collaboration with each other critical introspection occurred and thats when youve come a long way in learning.
 for the thesis developing an educational intervention to support workintegrated learning among professionals in health and social care for individuals with intellectual disabilities.
 contact anh truong doctoral student in workintegrated learning university west 46 73901 34 29 anh.truong@hv.se
 additive manufactured nibased superalloys with improved resistance to environmentallyassisted cracking
 nibased superalloys possess an excellent combination of mechanical properties and environmental resistance at elevated temperatures. however grain boundaries of the superalloys are always a source of weakness due to their interaction with gaseous environments. moreover these alloys exhibit sensitivity to dwell times time period at peak loads differently depending on the loads and environment. these problems are of particular concern when considering the application of nibased superalloys in the hot sections of aero and landbased gas turbines in which the components are exposed to high temperature corrosive gas streams whilst under high stresses for a long time. furthermore operating temperatures are rising markedly due to ongoing fuel efficiency demands and the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions hence failure resulted from socalled environmentallyassisted cracking eac is becoming prevalent and is now one of the major limitations to the application of nibased superalloys at elevated temperatures. the precise mechanism of eac is contentious necessitating systematic experimentation and associated characterization at the appropriate length scale to elucidate the underlying physical and chemical factors at play. powderbed fusion additive manufacturing pbfam techniques including selective laser melting slm and electron beam melting ebm can be used to fabricate nibased superalloys with the possibility to tailor the microstructure and reduce the risk of eac which can be extremely attractive for the gas turbine manufacturers. therefore the successive efforts to find a superior resistance to eac using am techniques motivate supreme. the overall goal of supreme is to elaborate the current understanding of cracking behavior of loadbearing ebmslmmanufactured nibased superalloys exposed to high temperature corrosive environments. the main focus will be to design a proper microstructure that can reduce the risk of eac in the am components
 surface engineering parttime campus yti600
 the course consists of seminars and laboratory experiments in the field of surface engineering.
 the main parts of the course
 introduction to surface engineering
 surface engineering methods
 surface metallurgy alteration
 surface chemistry alteration
 thin coatings
 thick coatings
 characterization of engineered surfaces
 study visit to a production facility
 15 hp in the advanced level in the field of mateirals science and manufacturing
 sustainability and contemporary political thought fulltime campus hsp100
 contemporary political thought is a module that introduces students to select contemporary debates in social and political theory through the lens of sustainability. for each of the three dimensions of sustainability environmental economic and social students will be exposed to cuttingedge debates relevant to realworld issues. in addition to being able to understand these theories and key thinkers in their own terms students will be expected to compare and contrast them with rival theories and also to critically assess them in relation to real world evidence. finally students will be expected to collaborate on a problemsolving task related to everyday sustainability to incorporate principles of wil into the course.
 sustainability climate adaptation
 one of the greatest social challenges that the world has is the climate crisis since it changes the conditions for life on earth. we at university west want to contribute to finding solutions to this crisis and as an academy and public authority to practice what we preach.
 on 21 may 2019 we therefore signed the climate framework for institutions of higher learning daybook nr 2019213 which is a collaboration between swedish institutions of higher learning. every school has signed has committed to reducing its negative impact on the climate within selected target areas in accordance with the paris agreement and the swedish climate policy framework with the end goal of net zero emissions by 2045. the universitys commitment is to design climate objectives in selected areas and take measures to achieve these goals. in addition we have signed the international appeal global universities and colleges climate letter in which we make the same commitment hv 2019677.
 the university has climate objectives that are followedup on in selected areas in which our net zero emissions of greenhouse gases will by 2045 be as close to zero as possible or negative in a base year analysis within that area. the areas are selected based on the demands stated in the climate framework and on the environmental aspects that are indicated in the relevant environmental study done in 2019 which besides the obligatory areas in the framework also points to contracts consumption and the use of resources as well as waste management as central aspects of the environment. furthermore the mapping of climate done by other institutions has been of value for determining where the greatest possibility for influence lies.
 climate objectives and strategies for the period of 20212023 are integrated into the universitys overarching strategy for sustainable development for the same period and are followed up within the framework for the universitys management system for sustainable development. the universitys overarching priorities are established in the annual business plan and in each sections business plan as well as in their plans of action.
 here you will find strategy for sustainable development
 you can read more about the longterm climate goals below.
 click here for more information
 we are the leading wiluniversity for lifelong learning and sustainable development
 students are attractive on the labour market equipped for lifelong learning and a driving force for sustainable development
 programmes with a special sustainability profile
 here you will find courses with a special sustainability profile.
 sustainability in the quality assurance system for education
 quality in education reports
 sustainability mainstreaming gender equality
 working with gender mainstreaming within the framework of agenda 2030 involves putting in place a gender equality analysis of the entire agenda to identify gender inequality that stands in the way of achieving sustainable development and the objectives in the agenda.  this means that it is not sufficient to work with objective 5 alone which explicitly deals with gender equality but rather to identify problems that have to do with gender inequality in the various objectives in the agenda that we as an institution of higher learning and public authority are affected by. to generate an accurate analysis of our problems with inequality and our need for interventions we need to understand that inequality is something that affects individuals and groups differently. therefore we need to produce an analysis using graphics that is based upon several power structures rather than simply gender such as ethnicity socioeconomicclassage factors. for this reason the interpretation of gender equality used in swedish universities gender mainstreaming projects is well suited to agenda 2030. lacking gender equality is still in focus but is viewed consistently from the perspective of intersectionality. this means that focus and analysis are grounded in how gender works together with other social power structures like ethnicity race class age sexuality and physical ability making possible a more complex and contextual understanding of the concrete obstacles to reaching social sustainability.
 all leadership management and support processes at university west are gender mainstreamed i.e. undergo a gender equality analysis and measures are taken as needed. this has to do with creating the circumstances for among other things
 equal representation and a level playing field in all governing and decisionmaking bodies at university west.
 the same salary for the sameequivalent work as well as equal distribution of resources and equal terms and opportunities for education choice of programme and personalprofessional development.
 students and employees with a good knowledge of gender equality and the ability to promote gender equality in the classroom working life and in society at large.
 employees and students being able to take the same responsibility for caregiving where they studywork and live.
 the same right to physical integrity regardless of gender and the university proactively preventing sexual harassment and genderbased vulnerability
 programme students with knowledge about gender equality and the competence to understand and solve gender equality challenges that are relevant for their profession and for society at large
 collaboration with external partners such as wil whose profile is characterized by gender equality
 analysing and when necessary adjusting selectionrecruiting processes as well as the terms for equal participation in governing and decisionmaking bodies
 analysing and countering unmotivated hierarchies and lack of independence among employees
 ensuring that gender equality is integrated in the universitys quality assurance system and that progress is made
 ensuring that there is gender equality in guidelines routines and approaches that affect career paths ex. recruiting employment distribution of tasks career counselling.
 analysing and ensuring gender equality in the terms indicated for education and personalprofessional development for both students and employees
 continuing to map out and meet the need for knowledge about gender equality of students and employees.
 identifying needs and measures to be taken for ensuring the possibility of combining studies work and private lifecaregiving.
 department and section heads responsibility for holding together integration locally and ensuring that there is structure in the work being done
 programme and course coordinators for the introduction of perspective in the syllabi
 appointed administrators within the university administraion and study and academic support library and educational development in the form of support for operations and centres at the university
 detailed information about background priorities and suggested activities for those responsible for prioritizing and focusing these efforts can be found in appendix 1.
 the necessity and importance of considering the sustainability in related to ai and automation projects and applications are significant and critical. therefore the course aims to increase the knowledge and understanding of core sustainability elements and concepts associated to the ai and automation domain. student will be introduced to demonstrate this awareness and consideration at implementing sustainability into such projects. the current trend of automation within industry 4.0 and industry 5.0 in relation with the sustainability in general will be highlighted. moreover competence skill and judgmental approach around sustainability in ai and automation will be focused.
 atm700automation systems and
 dil700deep learning or the equivalent.
 for a sustainable world
 the universitys vision
 we act and work together with society to create a more sustainable world. together with a wide range of partners we create knowledge and strive to make it more accessible.
 to achieve the vision the university works broadly to integrate sustainability with a particular focus on a number of areas
 equal terms and gender mainstreaming
 consumption and resource use
 waste and material use
 operational electricity
 news about sustainable development
 our work with sustainability
 equal terms and gender eqality
 the equal value of all people is a selfevident and fundamental prerequisite for the operations and activities of university west.
 the environmental work at government agencies is ultimately regulated by laws ordinances and the governments annual directive letters.
 wexsus is a collaborative platform for sustainable development that strengthens societys ability to transition.
 the universitys collaboration platform for complex societal challenges.
 this is how we work at university west
 read more about university wests externa work with sustainability
 steering documents within sustainability
 sustainable finance fulltime campus hbf100
 the financial sector is the key to a sustainable future. while traditional finance focuses solely on financial return and risk sustainable finance considers financial social and environmental returns in combination. this course combines theory empirical analyses and policy to explain the sustainability challenges for corporate investment. it explains how finance can steer resources to certain companies and projects without sacrificing return and thus speed up the realization of the 2030 agenda and to achieve the sustainable development goals sdgs and the paris agreement.
 sustainable manufacturing processes suman
 strong link to educationa strong link to education has also been created during the first three years of the profile. the infrastructure of modern equipment used in the project and associated personnel provides an in sweden unique laboratory environment for university engineering courses.
 the infrastructure concerning equipment is on a high level examples of new equipment the last year is cmt welding equipment for robotized deburring and suspension plasma spray equipment that enables spraying of nanostructured ceramics.
 examples of technical results are
 new thermal barrier coating systems. the goal in this project is to develop low  conductive and longlife thermal barrier coatings. the developed coatings have showed very promising thermal and functional performances. the thermal conductivity is half of the stateofart used today in industry and the lifetime is two times longer. our partner siemens is now running engine tests and coating qualification procedures in order to implement the coating industrially.
 the arcmodelling project made an important breakthrough when a solution for the  modelling of the areas close to the welding electrode and base material could be achieved. verification experiments were carried out at esab with satisfying results.
 sustainable motions  smoothit
 the smoothit project will develop models methods tools and optimization algorithms to help swedish industry create smoother robot movements which will decrease energy use and increase lifetime.
 the smoothit project thus aims to develop tools and methods to increase the awareness of energy usage and by that realize design and decision support during virtual development to create sustainable motions. tools and methods will also be developed that can monitor the production and identify motions that need to be improved or maintenance work that should be planned. in addition online tools will be developed that can automatically optimize the production by tuning the motions to reduce the energy use and increase the lifetime of the devices.
 the project is divided in three areas
 virtual development and the digital twin
 condition monitoring and maintenance and
 online prediction and optimization.
 in the first area tools and methods will be developed in order to increase the awareness of energy usage and by that realize design and decision support during virtual development to create sustainable motions. the second area will develop tools and methods that can monitor the production and identify motions that need to be improved or maintenance work that should be planned. in the last area online tools will be developed that can automatically optimize the production by tuning the motions to reduce the energy use and increase the lifetime of the devices. these three areas will support swedish industry to improve all motions in production and make them sustainable.
 the involved partners in the project are chalmers university of technology university west fraunhofer chalmers center volvo car corporation ab volvo scania gkn and abb. this project combines smart modelling simulation optimization machine learning and data aggregation into a test bed and develops a set of software tools that can be used by the industrial partners at the end of the project.
 sustainable production through laboratories for material characterization
 the aim of the project is to strengthen innovation processes competence maintenance and knowledge within sustainable production within manufacturing companies in the regional area.
 sustainable travel to and from abroad
 for those who have been granted a studies or internship at one of our partner universities covered by the erasmus program usually institutions within the eueea or who have been accepted to a blended intensive programme bip  there is the possibility of receiving compensation for sustainable travels.
 if you choose a more environmentally friendly mode of transportation for the majority of your trip both outbound and inbound you may be eligible for additional compensation for green travel
 a topup grant of 50 euros for a sustainable travel option
 up to 4 extra travel days added into the scholarhip period
 if you choose to travel green you need to notify us at the international office because we need to include this in the calculation of your compensation. you will also need to submit evidence to support the green mode of transportation.
 environmentally friendly modes of transportation green travel can include
 car with at least 2 people carpooling
 read more on sustainable travels
 information in swedish
 dedicate directed energy deposition for industrial competitiveness in additive manufacturing technologies
 welding  weldingbased additive manufacturing
 welding is a essential fabrication process in many industries. in recent years weldingbased additive manufacturing has emerged as a revolutionary technology offering significant advantages.
 welding is a fabrication process that joins materials typically metals by causing fusion. this is achieved through the application of heat pressure or both creating a strong bond between the materials. welding is essential across various industries including automotive construction aerospace and manufacturing.
 in recent years weldingbased additive manufacturing am has emerged as a revolutionary technique. also known as 3d metal printing it involves building objects layer by layer using welding processes such as laser or electron beam welding.
 this method offers significant advantages including design flexibility reduced material waste and the ability to produce complex geometries not feasible with traditional manufacturing methods.
 weldingbased am finds applications in diverse fields from producing customized medical implants to fabricating aerospace components.
 linus elf prduction technical manager fredriksons verkstads ab
 robert pederson professor of materials technology university west
 robert pederson professor of materials technology
 thematic leader  welding  welding additive manufacturing
 this course gives an overview of arc welding processes and their industrial applications particularly from a sustainability perspective coupled with quality and productivity. the course will focus on arc welding processes and cover the basic topics including arc physics droplet transfer heat input optimization of welding parameters quality and productivity. modern controlled waveform welding will be illustrated and its impact on welding activity will be explained. in connection with this modern welding equipment will be introduced.
 the course is mainly delivered via distance learning in flexible netbased form with one physical meeting. online lectures are combined with supervision and reporting meetings using webbased meeting systems. some course meetings are compulsory.
 this course is aimed at you who want to learn more about the sustainability aspects in welding or already have practical experience but want to increase your theoretical knowledge of modern welding processes.
 this course has been developed in collaboration with industry within the framework of one of our educational projects. the project aims to provide advanced level courses to a mix of students and professionals in order to strengthen the competitiveness of swedish industry.
 this course gives an overview of welding processes and their applications particularly highlightingsustainability aspects based on industrial application. the course will focus on arc welding processes and covers the basic topics including arc physics droplet transfer heat input optimization of welding parameters and productivity with consideration of how this affects the sustainability of welding activities. modern controlled wave form welding will be illustrated and its impact on welding activity will be explained. in connection with this modern welding equipment will in introduced. in the end the student should be able to select welding process based on industrial needs and make proposals for optimizing welding parameters for enhanced productivity in line with sustainable production.
 this course is aimed at people working in technology and development related to welding but not limited to who have the ambition to enhance and develop their knowledge about welding technology.
 the course includes the following modules
 overview of welding process and arc welding
 arc welding processestig welding submergy arc welding saw migmag welding gmaw
 welding parameter optimization and process window including requirements
 controlled waveform welding process
 equipment used in modern arc welding
 case study
 topic seminar presentation and discussion
 sweden in a postcolonial world fulltime campus spv200
 this course explores cultural political and economic legacies of colonialism by centering on sweden as a part of this postcolonial world. in addition to learning about histories of colonialism and decolonization questions of the following kind will be discussed in what ways may sweden be part of  and benefit from  postcolonial political and economic relations if at all? are there struggles over cultural identity in sweden that can be tied to a european colonial legacy? to what extent and in what ways are politics in sweden characterized by colonial ideas if at all? the course treats a number of theoretical attempts to understand postcolonialism and utilizes these theories to shed light on sweden in a postcolonial world and a postcolonial world in sweden.
 the course is divided into three main units. 1 the first unit centers on the history of european colonialism and the decolonizing process 2 the second moves to understanding theories of postcolonialism and how these grapples with the postcolonial legacy and 3 the third unit focuses on postcolonial ideas and practices in concrete politics and the colonial legacy as well as postcoloniality in sweden.
 the words come from ngawang sonam environmental coordinator at tibetan settlement office who visited university west recently.
 ngawang sonam from tibetan settlement office on campus.
 ngawang sonam was here for two major reasons  to renew the agreement on workbased training and field projects for primarily the nursing students and students following the programme social psychiatric care and to give a lecture on environmental issues related to the tibetan settlement office.
 in india the department of home the second of the 7 cta departments is responsible for the welfare and rehabilitation of the tibetans in exile. there are 45 tibetan settlement offices under this department in india nepal and bhutan. it looks after 15 agriculturebased settlements 13 handicraft based settlements and 16 cluster and scattered communities in india.
 lecture about clean upper dharamshala programmengawang sonam environmental coordinator at tibetan settlement office at the centre for sustainable development gave a lecture about clean upper dharamshala programme and the history of environmental desk tibetan settlement office. he also took the opportunity to meet the responsible for the organization focusing on sustainability within the university to exchange experiences.
 at the lecture he started by introducing the structure of central tibetan administration government in exile in a general sense and then continued to sustainability issues with the charter of clean upper dharamshala programme as a focal point. he also covered the history of environmental desk tibetan settlement office.
 sweden is a role model for waste disposal so i learn a lot when im here. the university has arranged several study visits and im really privileged. for me it is a double benefit to come here  both to learn about the waste area and to meet the teachers and those responsible for the nursing programme and the programme social psychiatric care says ngawang sonam.
 collaboration for many yearssince 2006 university west has a longstanding collaboration with the tibetan settlement office dharamsala india. the purpose is for students from sweden to be received in india to complete workbased training vfu but also field projects. students can participate in school substance abuse care womens projects and work with disabled children. experience is also exchanged between teachers.
 the students get a chance to see other things and new perspectives when they are here which of course gives them useful experiences says ngawang sonam.
 additive manufacturing is a highly interesting technology for industries striving towards more sustainable production says robert pederson professor of materials engineering at university west.
 technology with many advantages
 additive manufacturing of metals is used to produce a variety of products ranging from custom built medical products such as implants to large structural components in aircraft engines. the technology involves building up a product layer by layer by using metal powder or metal wire.
 the advantages and possibilities of additive manufacturing are significant and varied. the technology is seen as a crucial part of the next generation of industrial production where sustainability requirements are high. the manufacturing method provides more efficient use of materials and shorter lead times compared to conventional manufacturing methods.
 swerim supports the swedish arena for additive manufacturing of metals  a network for collaboration with the goal of increasing implementation and accelerating sustainable industrialization. read more läs mer
 swedish arena for am of metals 2024
 this annual academic conference is arranged by the swedish arena for additive manufacturing of metals which is a network for collaboration with the goal to increase adoption and speed up sustainable industrialization of metal am coordinated by swerim.
 why?
 phd students and postdocs will present and highlight their most recent findings.
 what?
 university west is located in the city of trollhättan sweden. the town is beautifully situated along the göta river and has a rich history of industry and innovation and is today home to many large medium and small manufacturing companies. how to get here? youll find information further down on this page.
 the registration fee is 2000 sek incl. vat which includes access to all invited talks and sessions during the conference lunch mingle dinner on the 10th of january and lunch on the 11th of january.
 welcome to register open until january 1 2024
 the conference is organised by the swedish arena for additive manufacturing of metals. university west is hosting the conference and kth royal institute of technology linköping university luleå university of technology chalmers university and swerim are coorganising.
 dont hesitate to contact us at saam2024@hv.se
 swedish arena for am of metals academic conference
 0830 registration and coffe0900 claes fredriksson welcome and introduction
 session 1  session chair johan moverare
 0920 invited speaker viktor sandell gkn aerospace am implementation and qualification at gkn aerospace0950 gowtham soundarapandiyan chalmers revealing the effects of ti6al4v powder oxidation on laser matter interaction with in situ high speed synchrotron x ray imaging1010 coffee1030 invited speaker tatiana fedina swerim material and process aspects in laser based additive manufacturing.1100 linda squillaci university west wider powder particle size distribution of ti 6al 4v for pbf lb process.1120 karthikeyan thalavai pandian university west effect of surface roughness on fatigue life of electron beam powder bed fusion manufactured ti 6al 4v.1140 jitendar kumar tiwari chalmers investigation on a functionally graded yszin718 composite produced by laserpowder bed fusion.1200 lunch
 1330 gökce aydin university west directed energy deposition of modified ph 13 8 mo powder.1350 carl andersson ltu predicting the grain texture evolution in additive manufacturing.1410 ahmed fardan jabir hussain chalmers pbf lb of a non weldable ni base superalloy microstructure and residual stress control.1430 coffee1500 invited speaker suhas sreekanth  gkn aerospace fractography of directed energy deposited alloy 718 subjected to notch rupture testing.1530 zhuo xu ntnu assessing fatigue endurance of in718 gyroid lattice structures fabricated through laser powder bed fusion exploring relative densities.1550 serena lerda kth asbuilt characterization and defect analysis of different nibased superalloys manufactured with electron beam powder bed fusion ebpbf.1610 malan jayawickrama university west study of the surface oxide accumulation in wire arc additive manufacturing of high strength low alloy steel.1630 kameshwaran swaminathan university west laser powder bed fusion of haynes 282 characterization with and without powder.
 mukesh murai chalmers. laser additive manufacturing of novel soft magnetic materials
 1830 conference dinner folkets hus in the center of trollhättan
 0900 invited speaker stefan roos msu0930 prabhat pant uppsala university defect detection in additively manufactured metal components using neutron grating interferometry ngi0950 hanna nilsson åhmanswerim l pbf processability of magnesium alloys influence of processing unit.1010 marion caroline defer dtu. microstructural evolution of additively manufactured alsi10mg during high temperature annealing1030 coffee1100 invited speaker bharat mehta chalmers1130 xiaobo wang dtu additive manufacturing induced cell structure in laser powder bed fusion stainless steel 316l 3d morphology and formation1150 shafaq zia ltu quality assessment of additively manufactured 316l steel based on ultrasound and variation in material properties.1210 zhihao pan dtu laser powder bed fusion of high carbon stainless steel using overspray powders from spray forming.1230 concluding remarks end of official conference1240 lunch followed by tour to production technology centre for those that have prebooked this1330 ptc lab tour. gather outside campus at 1330 to catch a prebooked bus. 1445the bus returns to campus.
 how to get to trollhättan
 how to get to university west
 university west is located in central trollhättan sweden with proximity to car parking trains and buses. the university is located right in the center of town next to drottningtorget and opposite the municipal hall and a large water tower which are helpful landmarks in trollhättan. our vistiting address is gustava melins gata 2 461 32 trollhättan
 arriving by car
 the universitys parking is accessible from the town hall roundabout on the right into gustava melins gata.
 on weekdays between 0800 and 1600 both payment and permission are required to park in the universitys parking lot. the permit is digital and valid from 0800 on the specified start date and entitles you to parking subject to availability. payment via easyparks app. more information can be found on signs in the car park. a parking permit can only be produced if you have filled in the necessary information when registering to the conference.
 our car park is very popular with students and staff so we cannot guarantee that there will be space for you even if you have a parking permit. free parking spaces are available at the ice stadiumice hall approximately 600 meters from the university. attention this refers to the upper car park drive past the car park that is closest to gärdhemsvägen nils ericsons gymnasiet and turn up to the left. no special parking permit is required.
 arriving by train
 if you arrive to trollhättan by train you can choose between taking a bus to drottningtorget or walking directly to the university which takes about 10 minutes. if you walk from the train station you pass the bus terminals. cross the road and follow djupebäcksgatan located to the left of the park straight ahead and you will reach the college.
 finding the conference area
 the conference will take place at campus in room f127 building f on ground floor. we suggest that you enter through the main entrance and there will be further signs to guide you to the right place. find your way
 you can always get help at the service center to find your way around campus and we will put up physical signs to hopefully help you on your way
 we invite you to an intimate and fun networking dinner where food and a few drinks are included for all registered conference delegates. to arrange with a sustainable conference we kindly ask for you to give us a notice if you plan to attend via the registration form.
 swedish universities sign collaboration agreement
 on friday 26 march the vicechancellors of chalmers university of technology university of gothenburg university of borås university of skövde university west and jönköping university signed an agreement on alliance cooperation. the collaboration is called university network of west sweden and the goal is to develop the quality and diversity of the parties operations.
 top row stefan bengtsson vicechancellor at chalmers eva wiberg vicechancellor at the university of gothenburg mats tinnsten vicechancellor at university of borås. bottom row martin hellström vicechancellor at university west lars niklasson vicechancellor at university of skövde agneta marell vicechancellor at jönköping university
 i see it as a concentrated effort to promote sustainable development in our region. i hope is that the alliance will enable students to profile their educations even more through the increased choices that this will provide says martin hellström vicechancellor at university west.
 the universities have identified several priority areas for collaboration such as competence supply and competence development effective administrative support processes and increasing the opportunities for students to study at several of the universities.
 according to the vicechancellors the agreement is not about a merger instead the purpose is to strengthen the alliances as well as the individual institutions profiling competitiveness and attraction.
 representatives from the county administrative board of västra götaland the county administrative board of jönköping county and the region västra götaland were also present at the signing.
 a development of regional cooperation in west sweden will make an important contribution to regional development in our county. increased opportunities for education secure important parts of our need for competence both now and in the future says johan löwenadler davidsson county councillor in jönköping county.
 steering group and coordination group are appointed
 to support the development of university network of west sweden three groups have been formed
 a steering group consisting of the vicechancellors.
 agroup of heads of administration and a coordination group.
 an administrative resource is linked to the coordination group and financed jointly by the parties.
 the chairmanship will rotate annually and is initially held by eva wiberg vicechancellor at the university of gothenburg.
 university network of west sweden consists of
 chalmers university of technology
 university of borås
 information om hur du synkar din epost till iphone.
 tryck microsoft exchange.
 the course is a continuation course that focuses on system development of mobile applications. the course teaches similarities and differences between different development environments and architectures. furthermore the course addresses how to use the mobile phones hardware as well as the special requirements placed on design and navigation in a mobile application.
 gpa130fundamental programming with an objectoriented language and
 monday the 4 dec between 18 and 22 nordunet will make a number of changes in their infrastructure. services that may be affected are among others hvplay and zoom.
 system maintenance old booking tiles
 between 16.30 and 22.30 it will not be possible to make or see bookings via the older booking plates outside the meeting rooms. this is due to a system maintenance
 systems and control parttime campus srt700
 the technical content of the course covered through lectures exercises and laboratory work reviews concepts and topics which students are expected to have some familiarity with from previous studies. these include models for stochastic dependence describing dynamical multivariable systems using timeinvariant ordinary differential equations transfer functions and state space representations stability assessment robustness margins synthesis and implementation of controllers.
 iai600introduction to artificial intelligence and machine learning or the equivalent.
 österrikeupper austria university of applied sciences hagenberg
 netherlandsfontys university of applied sciences eindhoven
 australiacentral queensland university rockhampton
 canadamount royal university calgary
 for information in english you can read a project summary pdf
 fas 1
 fas 2
 informationen uppdateras.
 tahere roshanzade  student from iran
 when choosing which country to study in two factors were especially important for tehere. first the country needed to be developed within the field of it. this would of course help tahere to develop herself.
 and also it was important that i can support myself financially. and sweden was the best choice for me tahere explains.
 that the choice of university later fell on university west depended on the programme content.
 i choose between different programmes at different universities. but my focus was on whether or not the programme included full stack and some programming. this major and field of study was important for me tahere says.
 studying in a new country
 tahere arrived in sweden at the end of summer 2022. now she has studied for a bit more than one semester. so far the studies are very different from what tahere has earlier experienced back in iran.
 when i studied in iran we focus more on reading  studying without any practical projects or anything like that she explains. but in contrast in this in this country we focus on more on practical learning and how we can deal with challenges.
 sometimes we feel a lot of pleasure tahere says. for example we had a course where we had to cover everything on full stack in one month. that was so stressful.
 the assignments tahere and her classmates are given even when stressful feel close to work life. because they had to cover and deal with many challenges it felt very efficient.
 this situation will happen in our work. maybe we will get some assignments like this in our career that we have to deal with. so this environment prepares us to work to be ready for our career and job.
 working together in groups or teams is very common in the swedish education system. as well as at many workplaces all over the world. this is yet another way of bringing the experience of education closer to working life. tahere has found it helpful.
 working in groups is so beneficial. when studying but also in work she says. this has been so efficient for us because we can discuss problems with each other and brainstorm solutions.
 this is something pretty new for tahere. in iran group works are not common and the study environment is much more hierarchical than in sweden. she explains the difference with an example.
 for example at my university in iran we must call each other by last name or title. also we cannot ask our questions during class in a simple way.
 tahere explains that she at first found it difficult to get a grip on the more informal studentteacherrelationship at university west.
 when i came here i asked the lecturer questions by saying sorry i have a question. they then would ask why do you say sorry im here to help you.
 as a result tahere and her classmates now ask questions in a more relaxed way and without any apprehension.
 here i see my teacher more as my friend who is here to help me to improve myself.
 coming to sweden trollhättan was a big change for tahere. having lived in both smaller and bigger cities back in iran the quietness of the streets here was still a chock.
 people here go to sleep so early. in iran we do not have the same habits she says. because i lived in in one of the warmest places in iran people usually went out at night because the weather was better then. one night i went out here at eight at night... and i didnt see anyone
 another thing that differs a lot from her home country is the nature. i really like it here because of the woods and the nature.
 after her studies at university west are finished taheres goal is to go back to work again. now with new skills.
 i need to gain some more experience because at this time my knowledge is theoretical. i need experiences related to my studies she explains. and afterwards i want to get my phd.
 process understanding and weldability of laserpowder bed fusion manufactured alloy 718
 varestraint weldability testing of additive manufactured alloy 718
 a review of selective laser melting  process parameters and its influence on microstructure defects and strength in superalloy alloy 718.
 a numerical model for simulating the effect of strain rate on eutectic band thickness
 varestraint testing of selective laser additive manufactured alloy 718  influence of grain orientation
 microstructure of selective laser melted alloy 718 in asmanufactured and post heat treated condition
 influence of laser exposure time and point distance on 75μmthick layer of selective laser melted alloy 718
 a review of the effect of selective laser melting process parameters and its influence on microstructure defects and strength in the ironnickel based superalloy alloy 718
 taichi matsumoto  student from japan
 taichi matsumoto from japan is one of the first students to study a masters in sustainable development here at university west. the welldeveloped way of thinking of sustainability here in sweden was a big reason for choosing university west.
 taichi has been a student in sweden before. knowing he liked the swedish way of studying coming back for his masters was a good choice. i was an exchange student for one year in växjö during my bachelors he explains. i liked the learning environment. it was very student driven there was much group work and i enjoyed being an active student.
 now having studied at university west for two months taichi can confirm that the classes here are the way he likes them  student driven.
 its not like the lecturer is talking for one hour and students just sit and listen he says.
 instead students and lecturer discuss subjects together letting the students feel more involved in their learning. taichi explains that through us students outputting information we feel like we are deepening the learning.
 compared to studying in japan the amount of group work here at university west is very different. during the time hes been studying here there have already been two major group assignments. during which the students get to practice time management and planning discuss subjects together and think critically.
 one programme  two subjects
 the master in sustainable development covers multiple aspects of the subject. and thanks to lecturers discussions with fellow classmates and some guest lecturers taichi has gotten a wide range of perspectives and inspiration regarding sustainable development.
 besides sustainable development the programme also focuses on work integrated learning wil.
 wil is a very new concept for me taichi explains. i look forward to understanding the concept better and to learn how to apply it to sustainable development.
 wil is a complex subject with many applications. at first it can be a bit confusing but through participating in a weeklong event on campus taichi now has a much better understanding of wil than when he first started his studies.
 i saw a lot of informative presentations from scholars within wil from all over the world. and now im very interested in the subject  so i want to combine them and apply them he says.
 back in japan taichi lives in an urban area. so the closeness to nature is the first thing that comes to mind when asked about the perks of living in trollhättan.
 when i go to campus i take my bike though the forest taichi explains.
 the göta river runs trough the center of trollhättan. taichi and his newfound friends go there to rest or to take a fika. its really good for my menta health he says.
 taichi and his friends dont only sit by the river when theyre not studying  of course. for example they often come together to cook and to talk about whats been happening during the week.
 taichi and his fellow international students at a swedish cooking night at university west.
 taichis future is still unwritten. having only studied his masters for a couple of months hes still learning about all the possibilities out there within the field of sustainable development.
 one of these possibilities is continuing within the university world.
 another path for taichi might be going back to japan and starting work there. he sees many possibilities in japan since the country still has a long way to go to become sustainable.
 people are now starting to notice this as an important subject taichi explains. in japan there are not many people who have experience within the field of sustainable development. so i would like to go there with my narratives and skills i have gotten here in sweden and contribute to society.
 at a museum in gothenburg the uns sustainable development agenda was displayed.
 primus builds new knowledge in close cooperation with industry and other actors within society. by combining theory and practical knowledge we develop relevant valuable skills together that strengthen industry. this form of coproduction allows industry to benefit more quickly from new knowledge.
 get in touch and well tell you more
 tapertech
 tapertech tailoring of high performance parts through arc and laser additive manufacturing technologies
 additive manufacturing am of functional components including complex structures challenging to manufacture by conventional methods material removal is a reality in progress. am with metal deposition has gained interest beyond aerospace applications by using laser and arc welding processes as driving force.
 an additive manufactured wall for metallic applications.
 thus it is reasonable to assume that the competencies needed to study laser and arc am come from welding. the division of welding technology at university west has the unique possibility of joining proficiencies in welding metallurgy and mechanical characterization process development and control and process physics and modelling to pave the road in a synergy way to have am with metal deposition feasible to be used by the industrial sector.
 university west joined the four industrial companies bae systems hägglunds uddeholm ab trumpf maskin ab and esab ab to form the partner constellation of this proposal.
 bae systems hägglunds is potentially an enduser of am technologies for inhouse production of heavyduty and offroad vehicles components made of high strength low alloy structural steels. shortening lead times weight reduction and a decrease in the environmental footprint are key driven reasons. for bae systems hägglunds the major benefits seen in am compared to components manufactured with traditional cast or forged methods are significant cost savings and increased performance and added functionality.
 however am processes are inherently difficult to supervise and control due to the considerable number of process parameters and their complex correlation with each other. this leads to a high degree of uncertainty regarding material properties and defects in am components which significantly limits the applicability of the manufacturing method true in particular for businesses where a very high degree of reliability on component performance is required such as for offroad vehicles.
 according to trumpf there is more to explore in laser metal powder deposition technology. it is very relevant for a company as trumpf to be at the forefront of laser metal powder deposition. therefore trumpf is interested in having deep insights into the performance of their equipment in am applications as the initial stage for internal product development.
 esab in turn is a traditional welding consumables and arc power source manufacturing company. from esab point of view wirearc additive manufacturing waam is a part of the amarea that is still relatively seen less developed and even more so is the combination of laser metal deposition with powder lmdp and waam as proposed in this project.
 finally uddeholm produces modern powdersalloys and is interested in developing process parameters for lmdp. tooling is one area where substantial growth is being recognized since the advent of industrial am technologies.
 therefore the project in this proposal was strategically split into four subprojects listed in the following sequence
 additive manufacturing metallurgy of steels ammettapertech
 additive manufacturing modelling and simulation amsimtapertech
 additive manufacturing process development and control amproctapertech
 additive manufacturing mechanical characterization ampmechtapertech
 flowchart with the methodological strategy for developing the subprojects and to building up demonstrators.
 senior professor                        professor in welding technology
 teachers guide  student introduction
 in order for our new students to feel welcome get a good introduction to university west and complete their studies the first semester is of crucial importance.
 students who are helped to break the academic code and thus understand the academic rules of the game become more selfsufficient. the interaction between student and teacher then becomes an exchange where the content of the discipline and the program comes into focus. as a teacher you can facilitate new students by communicating what is specific to learning in higher education so that students gain insight into what is required and expected of them.
 remember not to give the students all the information at the same time and that the information may need to be repeated  starting their studies can be very throwing and mean a lot of new information for the student. think about when in the course the student needs the information for example the students need to know how to register for an exam but may not need to register for the exam in the first courses of the semester and thus have forgotten how to find the information and what they need to do until it should be used.
 click here to access the welcome information for new students on the student web
 important to to inform about
 examination and what happens after
 what you need to know about being a student
 before you start creating your course and communication plan
 about the teachers guide
 what we need to know about being a student
 inform what it means to be a student at a swedish university
 describe the swedish academic system and how university studies work
 introduce what we expect from students in higher education for example in terms of their own responsibility science critical approach analytical ability and independent problem solving
 introduce characteristic features of academic text reading and academic writing and clarify why and how to refer and cite
 clarify for students what it means with compulsory elements which elements are compulsory and what a supplement is and what it means
 you may want to tell the students about the support material produced by the university west library
 templates and instructions
 referencing
 the library also has a youtube channel with films on everything from how to borrow a book to guides in scientific writing.
 the language resoruce centre also offers several guides.
 students rights and obligations
 student influence is an important part of the education and its quality eg opportunities to evaluate courses and participate in program boards. when student representatives are appointed please inform the student about the assignment and refer the student to the student union the student union at the university west  shv.
 other key documents and important information to share with the students can be found here
 equal conditions and equality
 it is important to inform the students about their rights and obligations how the university handles harassment and where students should turn to if one draws attention to harassment.
 crediting
 students at university west can apply to have previous education or vocational activities credited. if the student is uncertain about how it works and what courses the student can count on contact the study and career guidance. more information and the process of credit assessment can be found in swedish.
 it makes it easier if the students are informed about how communication with teachers and administrative staff takes place
 inform who the students should turn to with which questions how they best communicate with these people and when it is easiest to reach them. read about the students rights and obligations.
 also inform about the students rights regarding complaints only available in swedish.
 review what canvas is and how the learning platform is used on the current course  program.
 review other systems that may be used in addition to canvas such as features in zoom.
 inform in which system the student finds what when the student should move in which system and what is expected of the student in for example canvas or zoom.
 keep in mind that the systems may look different for you as a teacher and for the student inform you about what it looks like for the student.
 give the students a comprehensive view of the program or course structure
 clarify the purpose and objective of the program with the help of the educational plan.
 clarify the purpose and objective of the course with the help of the syllabusbe clear to the students which elements are compulsory in each course and how they see it themselves
 be clear to the students which literature is mandatory for each course and how they see it themselves
 inform about the universitys rules and deadlines  e.g. what applies in the case of a supplement or reexam how many times the student can write a reexam
 introduce the course literature and gladly convey reading instructions in the course pm so that the students can orient themselves in their reading
 tell them that the course literature can be borrowed from the library or bought at gregarts for example.
 remember from the outset clearly state any eligibility requirements for promotion within programs
 introduce the various forms of work and examination used in the program  course eg group work seminars lectures homework
 it is important to point out that for fulltime studies it means 40 hours a week for the normal student
 important to inform that the student must register at each new course start within the program. the student registers themselves in ladok and registration opens four weeks before the start of the course and closes at the start of the course.
 teaching and communication in the training school  a cooperative project
 communication is a way for people to coexist and to exchange experiences and feelings. in the training school communication is both a subject with content as well as a way of transmitting and developing knowledge. the teachers of the training school use different ways of communicating with their students on a daily basis. they make plans and perform different activities with the purpose of developing the communicative skill of the students. the training school is characterized by consisting of students who have physical as well as cognitive difficulties to communicate in speech and writing. to be able to communicate with people in an environment gives the opportunity of taking part to a large extent and taking an own initiative which is why it is urgent to develop this branch of teaching in the training school.
 the project will be presented in two reports one which turns to professionals within the training school and one scientific report. the reports will be produced in spring 2018.
 teaching and learning in higher education for thirdcycle student parttime campus hpff010
 the course is primarily aimed at students in the first year of their doctoral study but may also have participants from later parts of the doctoral program. we also provide an overview of the relevant parts of national and local guidelines and regulations.
 the course deals with various aspects of learning and the acquisition of knowledge with a focus on being able to teach students at college  university. in the course auscultations are made within the subject area in which the doctoral student is to teach. in this context both the teacher role and the student role are emphasized. the course also includes knowledge of relevant laws and regulations as well as local governing documents at the university.
 the higher education pedagogy works to conduct courses and various forms of educational activities to enhance the quality of all the teaching conducted at university west.
 higher education pedagogy is the subject that teaching staff at swedish universities study to act professionally as teachers and as developers of education and courses they conduct. the pedagogical skills of teachers should always be current as new knowledge about higher education is constantly evolving and contributes to creating new approaches related to for example digitization internationalization inclusive pedagogy and sustainable development.
 the higher education pedagogy at university west consists of a multitude of teachers and specialists from various institutions who work together to create a learning arena for teaching staff. they are represented in various internal councils e.g. the ict council and working groups e.g. ail certification and digital examination. furthermore they collaborate with several neighboring institutions primarily with the pil unit at the university of gothenburg in courses themes and issues related to higher education pedagogy and pedagogical skills.
 see our courses in higher education pedagogy.
 qualification requirements for teachers
 as a teacher at university west you are required to have completed at least a 10week higher education pedagogical training or equivalent. if it is lacking at the time of employment you must have completed the training during the first two years of employment. all of our courses provide eligibility and broaden your teaching competence.
 are you considering enrolling in a higher education pedagogical course but are unsure about the prerequisites? to plan your pedagogical training or if you have questions about our courses and activities please contact akademus.
 teaching sensitive topics to international student groups
 wayne stephen coetzee ei offers insights from teaching sensitive subjects such as war the arms trade and socioeconomic development. he reflects on the challenges of teaching in culturally and educationally diverse student settings and   shares strategies for transforming classrooms into dynamic spaces that foster practical and inclusive engagement.
 team agera  an increased and deepened pupilhealth intervention through interprofessional collaboration
 the project is part of the swedish public health agencys folkhälsomyndigheten national program for supporting children in families with substance abuse problems psychiatric illhealth and violence.
 mattias ymefors team agera grästorps municipality
 public health agency of sweden
 result an extended pupilhealth intervention
 microsoft teams is a webbased tool for meetings and collaborations. in teams you can communicate via text speech and video. you who have a university west account have the opportunity to use teams. teams is part of office 365 and is therefore available both as an application for computer cell phone and tablet and as an online version in office 365 on the web.
 in teams you can among other things have digital meetings chat and make phone calls with or without video. in teams you can also create team sites where you can share files with others and send messages. you can connect to a teams meeting via a web browser and then go to office 365 on the web and select the teams app or you can use the teams desktop app that is part of the installation of office 365. teams is also available as an app for cell phones and tablets.
 guides for using teams
 microsoft teams video trainingmicrosoft teams help center
 guides for installing teams on computers tablets and cell phones
 click here to go to the web page about office software for private computer. there you will find guides for downloading and installing office 365 proplus which includes teams on computers tablets and cell phones.
 technical drawing and cad parttime campus rtk300
 this course is a basic course in cad and technical drawing also known as engineering drawing. the topics covered in this course are as follows.
 technical drawing
 introduction to engineering drawing that include why we need technical drawing what is the use of technical drawing use of thecnical drawing in diferent engineering fileds and historical aspect of technical drawing.
 process of creating engineering drawings from given 3d objects.
 visualisation of 3d objects from 2d engineering drawings.
 the theory behind standard orthographic projection methods first angle and third angle projections used in engineering drawings.
 standards in engineering drawing view placing line types lettering dimensioning geometric dimension and tolerance section views threads and screws.
 introduction to cad that include history of cad and importance of modern day cad in engineering applications.
 solid modelling theory topology definition data structures modelling strategies and basic rules exchange of cad model data and file types model assemblies.
 3d cad model creation using engineering drawings. this includes creation of 2d sketches dimensioning and using geometric constraints in 2d sketches creating 3d components using 2d sketches assembly of multiple mechanical components to achieve the desired functionality of the overall assembly.
 creating detailed 2d engineering drawings component drawing and assembly drawings using 3d cad models.
 minimum technical and software requirements for online learning courses
 you will need regular access to a personal computer with an internet connection. highspeed broadband access is necessary. for the optimal learning experience you need a computer system with a webcam  headset with microphone following these minimum requirements
 pc compatible operating system windows 7 8 or 10 web browser firefox chrome or edge
 communication software
 note that some software cannot due to legal issues be used from some countries. it is important that you test if it works from your country before you start the education. university west cannot be held responsible if it does not work and is unable to offer a workaround or an alternative solution.
 the specific software you need to check is
 canvas is the learning management system that university west uses for communication between lecturers and students. most of the communication and information is provided through this system or your student mail. in canvas you will find syllabuses compulsory modules exams and study schedules and other useful information for your programme.
 zoom is a webbased conferencing system with full audio video and screen sharing capabilities. the teachers at university west use zoom for teaching and supervision. when you connect to a zoomsession you should use a headset to get good quality audio.
 hvplay is the platform that is used for instructional movies and recorded lectures.
 test instructions can be found on
 technological transformation requires innovative thinking about learning
 digitization is one of several major structural transformations under way in society. the new technology presents changes and challenges in several areas  especially in industry said lars walter professor of workintegrated learning at university west.
 continued professional development will be a key issue for the next 10 years. bringing in young newly educated people is not sufficient. new roles and work methods await everyone working in the manufacturing industry. but that doesnt necessarily mean enormous change for everyone.
 many industrial companies will make major investments in new technologies. walter points out that investing in skills development and understanding the complexities of technological transformation are equally important.
 the staff needs to participate in the process from the start
 industry leaders generally do not seem very worried about new technology but they are giving more thought to how employees will adjust to it. before companies invest in new robotic manufacturing for example management needs to see this through the employees eyes. how does the new technology affect the work of the operator the middle manager the finance manager and others? what new skills do they need?
 it usually does not work to first bring in the technology and then deal with training. for optimal results the staff needs to participate in the process from the start. in this way costly mistakes can be avoided and the transformation will be smoother and faster.
 a comprehensive approach is important. technology and learning are two perspectives that need to be combined. we do not use a tunnel vision model but tie together hightech knowledge with knowledge of human behaviour says walter.
 how to integrate artificial and human intelligence in a smart way?
 our work involves understanding how artificial and human intelligence can be cleverly integrated into the digitization process of companies. without that knowledge there is a risk that faith in technology will either become too great or be eroded. employees professional knowledge will be equally important in the future even if professional roles look different. for the technological transformation to succeed employees need to participate in the design of the new production systems. their knowledge and experiences need to be integrated into the new digital tools.
 its a huge learning process for all the functions in the company. training needs to be done in new ways managers and management have a new basis for making decisions and the organisation is affected.
 more on ahil
 three areas of focus production processes production systems and industrial workintegrated learning.
 primus is financially supported by the knowledge foundation.
 university west is swedens leading university in the field of workintegrated learning wil.
 contact lars walter professor in workintegrated learning
 technologies for future electric car batteries
 the automotive industry faces major problems in the form of material shortages for semiconductors challenges in the continued mining of rare earth metals and competition for finite natural resources. these hurdles are particularly relevant for materials used in electric car batteries.
 electric vehicle batteries play a crucial role in the transition to a sustainable electrified vehicle fleet. batteries are a major competitive factor so every car manufacturer is looking for new solutions. customers are demanding longer range faster charging long service life and sustainable technologies that do not deplete natural resources says per nylén professor of production technology.
 safer lithiumion batteries with longer life
 most electric vehicles today are powered by lithiumion batteries. in this type of battery the quality of the welds between the various components is crucial. lower quality welds can lead to serious problems.
 we focus on developing a mix of materials in the joint to provide higher quality. we will also investigate which type of laser welding process offers the best results when manufacturing lithiumion batteries. with the right joint material and manufacturing method future lithiumion batteries can be both safer and longerlasting.
 next generation electric car batteries
 many battery manufacturers are investing heavily in developing solidstate thin film batteries because these can provide faster charging times higher safety and longer life than current lithiumion batteries. however todays thinfilm manufacturing methods to make solidstate battery components are illsuited for the largescale deposition of coatings. deposition rates are typically slow leading to high costs.
 the idea of using thermal spraying when manufacturing components for thin film solidstate batteries is now being tested for the first time. the hope is that it will give the battery components higher performance better safety and lower manufacturing costs.
 thermal spraying is used in a number of different product areas to improve the durability and performance of components  in everything from aircraft engine components to bone implants. it is a costeffective and versatile technology for giving components robust surface layers. we are now investigating how thermal spraying with liquid feedstock can be used to coat thin solidstate battery components. the techniques we use are suspension plasma spraying and solution precursor plasma spraying. we hope that the project can give swedish battery manufacturers access to a new robust coating platform for the development of solidstate thin film batteries. this can be a valuable contribution to the next generation of batteries for electric vehicles.
 novelcabs is a proofofconcept project conducted in close collaboration between university west and ångström advanced battery centre at uppsala university.
 temporary housing
 please choose preferred alternative below for your temporary housing.
 also state from which date you need this moving in date of accommodation is tbc
 online form below will be open until 5th january 2019 2359
 cyber omvårdnad teori och metodutvecklingcybernursing the project internet is now an integral part of everyday living not least of which among those who seek and offer support in cyberspace. as such cyber nursing has become an important activity to monitor.henrik eriksson högskolan väst martin salzmannerikson högskolan i gävle
 enhanced online and postproduction defect detection.
 surface quality of steel products has become more and more important during the last 10 years because the quality of the surface is not only affecting the aesthetic look and cost of the finished product but also the surface sustainability against many corrosion processes. therefore many surface quality monitoring systems have been brought to the market and almost all of these systems rely on a visual 2d picture.
 since these systems are relying on a visual picture of the surface they cannot function in any harsh environment and are therefore often placed down the production line as quality insurance measure. in recent years the fast development of thermal vision systems has given a new dimension to defect detection on the surface and perhaps near the surface of the product and at early stages of the production lines in the proposed study the capabilities of different thermal vison systems will be evaluated.
 the detection of different types of surface defects found at different stages of steel processing will be evaluated. the study will contain experiments and image analysis for detection of different types of defects. the outcome of the study will shed light on the advantages and shortcomings of these systems. a proposal for continuation of use of these systems will be put forward.
 enhanced online and postproduction defect detection
 chalmers university of technology sweden university of modena and reggio emilia italy ipp czechia technical university  chemnitz germany stony brook university usa forschungszentrum jülich germany indian institutes of technology  bombay kanpur ropar india university of stuttgart germany tampere university of technology finland university of turku finland  max iv  european spallation source sweden
 pratt  whitney  usa safran  france saint gobain  france man energy solutions  denmark treibacher  austria oerlikon metco  switzerland gkn aerospace siemens höganäs sandvik andritz abb scania volvo penta volvo trucks volvo cars ac floby tse lifesize
 effect of laser power on the deposition of alloy 718 powder on alumina substrate using laser directed energy deposition  a singletrack studydilipkumar choudary ratnala fabian hanning joel andersson shrikant v. joshi 2024
 sustainable production through advanced manufacturing intelligent automation and work integrated learning  proceedings of the 11th swedish production symposium sps2024 2024
 process parameter impact on axial plasma sprayed ytterbium disilicate coatings for environment barrier coating applicationsmadhura bellippady shivang dinesh parmar stefan björklund shrikant v. joshi nicolaie markocsan 2024
 influence of graphene nanoplatelets on the performance of axial suspension plasmasprayed hydroxyapatite coatings.pearlin amaan khan aravind kumar thoutam vasanth gopal aswin gurumallesh shrikant v. joshi arunkumar palaniappan nicolaie markocsan geetha manivasagam 2023
 characteristics and performance of suspension plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings on additively manufactured superalloy substratesmadhura bellippady manon florent stefan björklund xin hai li frykholm robert björn kjellman shrikant v. joshi nicolaie markocsan 2023
 thermal swing evaluation of thermal spray coatings for internal combustion engineswellington uczak de goes nicolaie markocsan mohit kumar gupta 2022
 influence of nozzle configuration and particle size on characteristics and sliding wear behaviour of hvafsprayed wccocr coatingskaveh torkashvand mohit kumar gupta stefan björklund francesco marra lidia baiamonte shrikant v. joshi 2023
 tribological performance of thin hvafsprayed wccocr coatings fabricated employing fine powder feedstockkaveh torkashvand mohit kumar gupta stefan björklund shrikant v. joshi 2023
 advances in thermally sprayed wcbased wearresistant coatings  cofree binders processing routes and tribological behaviorkaveh torkashvand shrikant v. joshi mohit kumar gupta 2023
 this course is aimed at you who want to learn about thermal spraying and how thermal spraying could make your processesproduction more sustainable. it is suitable for both beginners as well as those who have some experience in coating production or characterisation.
 the course contains an introduction to surface engineering and principles of different types of thermal spray processes. fundamental mechanisms of coating formation will be discussed. an overview of coating characterisation techniques and properties will be presented. real life examples where thermal spray can be used to promote sustainability will be provided.
 the course consists of online seminars and in person laboratory visit. the course is mainly delivered via distance learning in flexible netbased form with one physical meeting at the end of the course in combination with the laboratory visit. the course will be given in english.
 termisk sprutning thermal spraying
 termisk sprutning thermal spraying 25 hp
 the course will consist of online seminars that will introduce thermal spraying and discuss different aspects of thermal spraying from design of equipment to fundamentals of coating formation and coating characteristics. characterisation and assessment of properties of coatings will be also discussed. the course will end with a inperson meeting with thermal spray and material laboratory visit and examination.
 the course consists of online seminars and an in person laboratory visit. the course contains an introduction to surface engineering and principles of different types of thermal spray processes. fundamental mechanisms of coating formation will be discussed. an overview of coating characterisation techniques and properties will be presented. real life examples where thermal spray can be used to promote sustainability will be provided and discussed.
 testa microsoft copilot med ditt hvkonto
 come and test inspera on may 9th
 on may 9th the digital examination project offers an opportunity for you as a teacher to come and test and evaluate the new system inspera for digital oncampus eexamination primarily.
 tuesday may 9th 13.0016.00.theme test and evaluate the system support inspera
 read more about the digital examination project
 the aerospace industry can increase productivity by optimising conventional manufacturing methods or using new ones
 conventional milling is the current technique for manufacturing aircraft engine components using superalloy 718. but this process is often timeconsuming involving relatively small depth of cut in order to prolong the lifetime of the cutting tools. yet methods exist that show promise for this type of manufacturing which allows for significantly reduced manufacturing time but they arent as welltested.
 three new methods compared
 aircraft engine components are often made using superalloy 718  a high temperature alloy that sets extreme demands on the manufacturing.
 i examined both how conventional methods such as milling can be optimised and what is necessary for the alternative manufacturing methods to be able to meet the same highquality requirements. i then compared the methods and identified the most suitable strategy for achieving optimal productivity when manufacturing aircraft engine components.
 jonas has tested and compared three different manufacturing methods abrasive water jet machining awjm laser beam machining lbm and electrical discharge machining edm. the studies showed that two of them are most suitable.
 abrasive water jet most promising
 one of my conclusions is that the best combination for increasing productivity is to use abrasive water jet or electrical discharge machining for milling and then follow up with a surface treatment using conventional finishing milling. but there are also many other interesting options for finishing.
 continuing with advanced studies
 link to jonas holmbergs thesis high volumetric machining strategies for superalloy gas turbine components
 the art of avoiding cracks when welding alloys
 when welding different alloys together there is a risk that cracks and other defects will form. mikael johansson is an industrial doctoral student at alleima and is currently developing new knowledge to enable alloys to be designed with the right welding properties.
 i focus on alloys that can withstand high temperatures for applications such as power plant boilers says mikael who is part of the smart industry sweden industrial graduate school.
 i wanted to deepen my knowledge within this field and was given the opportunity to carry out postgraduate studies in parallel with my work at the companys rd department he explains.
 alleima develops and manufactures stainless steels and special alloys. these materials are designed for specific applications. for example if an alloy will be used in components for a power plant it must be able to withstand conditions such as high temperatures and high pressure. another important factor is that the alloy must have the right welding properties.
 the goal is to come up with a systematic approach that combines simulated weldability with physical weldability testing. every time we develop a new alloy we learn new things. identifying the links between different development processes makes our product development easier.
 contributes to greater knowledge
 mikaels work is contributing to greater knowledge and understanding of hot cracking in alloys. this knowledge is extremely valuable when designing alloys for different applications. it also enables us to give our customers better information and recommendations when it comes to the most appropriate welding techniques for their hightemperature alloys.
 find out more about smart industry sweden
 the book about am of highperformance metallic materials
 a new book on additive manufacturing am in highperformance metal materials is launched.
 we take a comprehensive approach to additive manufacturing  a technique that the industry sees fantastic potential in striving to produce in a more sustainable way says one of the authors robert pederson professor of materials engineering at university west.
 this is a comprehensive book with depth. we take a comprehensive approach to additive manufacturing  covering everything from raw materials the most common am processes for demanding applications postprocessing metallurgy modelingmonitoring of both materials and am processes to nondestructive testing and mechanical properties of the finished material says robert.
 it feels fantastic that the book is now ready to be distributed. it has taken two years to complete and it has been a sometimes demanding but at the same time a very instructive process. the book will be used in advancedlevel courses and for doctoral students. it may also be of interest to industry employees working with various am processes and metallic materials.
 more about the book additive manufacturing of highperformance metallic materials outlines the stateoftheart on am in high performance materials utilizing the two most industrially interesting routes of powder bed fusion pbf and directed energy deposition ded. the book delves into feedstock processing monitoring and control modeling and simulation and surface and thermal posttreatments. it specifically addresses materials and the most relevant and high performance applications namely nibased alloys and titanium alloys and also provides insights into potential applications through illustrative case studies. with each chapter contributed by experts in the field this work will serve as a comprehensive resource for graduate students and practitioners alike.
 the campus development  from a student perspective
 intensive work is currently underway to develop the campus as a part of the campus development plan 2030. we asked the chairman of the student union paulina samuelsson what she thinks this development will mean for the students.
 i believe the campus development as a whole is of great importance to the students not only because it shows that the university is growing and developing it will also contribute to more places to study and meet for the students. in a normal situation with oncampus education campus can quickly become crowded so there is a need for more space and more group rooms in different sizes. the new meeting square with accompanying café section will be a great boost it will be a place the students will be able to use both for studies and socializing.
 what are the main benefits of developing the campus?
 if you look at the entire campus development plan one of the biggest positives is that university west keep on evolving and becoming an even more attractive campus to apply to. not only because of improved study areas and development of learning environments. also because there will be more life on campus in the form of service and activity and above all with student housing on campus.
 we at the student union see this as a very positive development and we hope it will contribute to trollhättan becoming a more attractive city for students. it will enable new opportunities to include and integrate international students more in student life in trollhättan.
 what do you think will be extra beneficial for the students with the campus development?
 above all university west will become a more attractive place to study. when the construction starts i think it will send a message  that the university and the city appreciate and cherish having students here.
 in general campus is not only a place for studying and learning but it can also be so much more. with the campus development even more opportunities will be made possible for example being able to increase accessibility to both libraries and meeting places. many students need physical and interpersonal encounters to be able to improve in their studies and learning. i believe that these needs will be will be met in a better way with this campus development.
 collaboration is a big part of the work on campus development plan 2030. included in this collaboration are university west the student union at university west the city of trollhättan property owner kraftstaden and the municipal housing company eidar.
 read more about the work with campus development plan 2030
 new roles and ways of working await everyone working in manufacturing. competence development will be a key issue over the next ten years. photo kent eng for university west.
 digitalisation means that many industry companies are investing heavily in new technologies. it is equally important to invest in staff competence development and to understand the complexities of the technological transition.
 the step from investing in new technologies to getting a working industrial practice is often longer and more complex than anticipated. its not enough for the organisation to learn how to use the new technology it must also work well with the systems and processes already in place says lars walter professor of workintegrated learning with focus on digitalisation of industry university west.
 industry leaders generally dont seem to be worried about the new technologies but are more concerned with how employees will receive them. before investing in a new robot fleet for example management needs to look through the eyes of the employees. how does the new technology affect the work of the operator the middle manager the financial officer and others? what new competencies do they need?
 bringing in the technology first and then figuring out what new knowledge and learning is needed doesnt normally work. for the best results staff must be involved in the process from the start. costly mistakes can be avoided in this way and the transition will be smoother and faster.
 its about understanding how artificial and human intelligence can be cleverly integrated into companies digitalisation process. it is a great learning process for all functions in the company.
 on integration between artificial and human intelligence  the ahil project
 in the restart project we are studying how unexpected production stoppages occur how to avoid failures and create solutions to facilitate restarts for example by using an aiar system for operators and maintenance staff.
 on the problems surrounding unplanned production stops  the restart project
 competence development and lifelong learning.
 the climate framework
 universities and colleges have a central role in the work to combat climate change. by 2030 every higher education institution that has joined the climate framework must have implemented measures so that it is in line with the 1.5degree target.
 in 2019 the majority of swedish universities and colleges joined the climate framework.  since 2021 suhfs expert group for collaboration has taken responsibility for the climate framework.
 the climate framework is a framework for higher education institutionspecific climate strategies with the aim of engaging universities and colleges in sweden to contribute to both national and international commitments to achieve the socalled 1.5degree target.
 the climate framework has been created on the initiative of universities and colleges with the ambition to clearly contribute to the climate transition in line with societys national and international commitments.
 to suhfs website  where you will find the climate framework as pdf
 this is the commitment that the higher education institutions make within the climate framework
 we will reduce our own climate impact in line with societys commitments as expressed in national and international agreements.
 we will set farreaching goals for climate work and also allocate resources so that we can achieve these goals and carry out followups.
 we will clearly communicate our climate work to inspire and spread knowledge toother actors and to members of society.
 you can find university wests decided climate goals here.
 the higher education climate network coordinate the universities work reaching the climate goals within the network.
 chairman maivor olssontall senior lecturervice chairman eva johansson senior lecturer
 other members
 representative from funnatalya galan senior lecturer
 the connected classroom allows students to join the classroom at a distance.
 a large number of classrooms are now equipped with technology that allows you to connect your classroom via zoom. the film shows how the technology in the classroom works.
 technology in the connected classroom
 you connect your classroom through zoom on your own computer and use the classrooms audio and video equipment. for this to work properly you need to check a number of settings and follow the procedure below. note remember to follow the procedure below to ensure that all equipment is started correctly and can work with your computer.
 for pc press windows button  p  choose extend
 for mac press apple symbol  system preferences  displays  arrangement
 wall panel
 press the green button hdmi for displaying the computer screen on the projector screen.
 press any of the blue buttons camera positions for activating the camera.
 log in to the online meeting and check audio and camera settings
 speaker infocus3128d
 microphone
 the microphone is a table microphone and it should be placed towards you as the picture shows.
 there are two presets on the wall panel. press repeatedly for the desired camera position.
 button 1  camera positions teacher overview sitting by the desk standing by the table
 button 2  camera positions whiteboard whiteboard from left to right projector canvas.
 start the presentation  to show a presentation both to the participants in the classroom and to the participants online share the presentation in zoom. select share and screen 2 mac desktop 2. screen 2 is the same as the projector screen. this is important to think about when you use presenter view.  the slideshow is then displayed for the participants in the classroom as well as for the participants online and on your laptop presenter view is displayed with your notes.
 if you do not use presenter view the edit mode will be displayed  if you do not see screen 2 in zoom when sharing check that the  computer is in extend mode and that the system is in hdmi mode.
 leave the online meeting and turn off the system by pressing the red button off on the wall panel.
 this instruction is also available as a print out
 the democracy initiative
 university west universitys strategic focus on democracy issues in higher education.
 what should we do?
 one of the tasks of the swedish university is to create opportunities for students to develop their ability to act as active citizens in a democratic society both during student time and afterwards. within the framework of the bologna agreement which aims to promote quality and internationalization in european higher education and as sweden has signed this is stated. the democracy perspective is also an important part of the common value base for state employees.
 in practice this means that our education needs to be deliberately designed so that democratic ideals social responsibility civic engagement and value issues get a place in the education.
 in sweden there is no strong tradition of this work. nor has the work on the bologna process been particularly important at national level. it is therefore important that work is started locally and university west wants to show the way.
 what can we do?
 because we do not have a strong national tradition of democracy in higher education in sweden there is also not much experience to lean against. the initial steps are therefore to raise awareness of employees and students on the importance of the questions in general and to seek cooperation with international organizations and institutions. in many other countries not least in the united states there is a multifaceted work.
 first of all we look for what is commonly called best practice that is ways to work with questions and practices that have proven to work. where can efforts be put in? the bay significance has control documents? what training activities work? how can you work with the surrounding community? what traps should you avoid at work?
 an association of american universities working with democracy and tolerance
 an association of higher education institutions working to help vulnerable threatened and persecuted academics
 photo gkn aerospace
 the influx of new knowledge and new individuals benefits the entire department. the advantage of industrial doctoral students is that their assignments are often tailored to our needs. that means that they can have a tighter connection to the company says patrik johansson who coordinates the doctoral students at gkn aerospace.
 builds strong academic centers
 the father  child relationship a longitudinal study over 33 years
 today our life has significantly improved thanks to laser technology. this is the reason why i am interested in further developing this technology and want to contribute with my small brick says
 antonio ancona new professor of automation technology with focus on control and inspection of manufacturing processes at university west.
 meet antonio who divides his working time between university west and university of bari in italy.
 during my university studies in physics i was fascinated by optics photonics devices and especially lasers. thanks to the impressive technological development of the last decades lasers have found new applications in many fields from environmental monitoring to medicine telecommunications and materials processing and probably in the future for quantum computing. today our life has significantly improved thanks to laser technology. this is the reason why i am interested in further developing this technology. i want to contribute with my small brick.
 how come you have chosen to work in both italy and sweden?
 how does it work to work at two universities in different countries?
 what has your career been like up until today?
 i am pleased with my career. i would do it all again. this work has allowed me to study know and learn a lot travel and meet the most influential scientists in the world who work in my sector. i hope to pass on some of what i have learned to my students.
 contact antonio ancona professor of automation technology university west
 current status and next steps
 a report is produced before each steering group meeting to summarize recent work with hrs4r and its implementation. the goal is to provide an overall overview of the work and plans for future work. these reports are subsequently published on this page.
 many of the activities outlined in the action plan are already underway or align with other ongoing development initiatives at the university. however some activities are entirely new and are being introduced in conjunction with the implementation of the charter and code. a lot has happened at the university since the data gathering for the gap analysis which may necessitate adjustments to the action plan to accommodate these new conditions.the implementation phase spans two years and will be followed by a selfassessment and a revision of the action plan with a deadline set for 12th may 2025.
 the european charter  code consists of 40 principles and four thematic areas
 ethical principles and professional responsibility
 working conditions
 there are several reasons why university west sees a value to follow the european charter  code
 it shows that we support any necessary changes to our working culture.
 your rights as a professional are recognised and enhanced.
 your mobility experience is valued.
 your worklife balance is respected.
 your recruitment will follow a transparent process.
 hrs4r procedure at university west
 the working group regularly invited the steering committee to meetings with a clear agenda to review documentation and make recommendations. the steering group guided the working group on complex issues. the steering group also pointed out several functions to the dialogues for production of the action plan.
 continuous enhancements in areas such as working conditions and career opportunities are among the top priorities of our university. we therefore welcome the opportunity of performing the internal analysis in the framework of the hrs4r and aim at embedding this process in the wide array of current activities in our institutions human resources policy.
 professor martin hellstromvicechancellor university west
 hrs4r action plan
 hrs4r report 2023
 information on our swedish web
 interested in knowing more or want to get in touch with the working group?
 voltage stability and the risk of a voltage collapse is one of the stability phenomena that are dimensioning for the swedish power system. the project aims to increase knowledge about how the energy transition with new production sources new consumption extended networks and varying power flows will affect the voltage stability in the power system and how the new production sources can actively contribute to increase the voltage stability.
 increased knowledge provides the opportunity to utilize various production sources and other equipment more efficiently integrate more renewables onshore and offshore and operate the power system closer to its limits as the margins of uncertainty will decrease. in this way the power transmission can be increased which also leads to a more efficient utilization of the power system and thus lower socioeconomic costs.
 the industry must look beyond digital technology.
 in an era of rapid technological development swedish manufacturing companies are exploring how to adapt to the new digital age. a new thesis from university west highlights how social aspects play a crucial role when companies take steps toward embracing this new technology.
 swedish companies are facing a transformative period where the role of technology is becoming increasingly central. one challenge for companies is to balance the interaction between humans and technology in an increasingly digitized industry. companies tend to primarily focus on technological advancements risking overlooking the humancentered aspects.
 to streamline and strengthen competitiveness production and several support functions are becoming increasingly digitized. changed roles and work methods await everyone working within the manufacturing industry. but how does one implement a digital transformation sustainably?
 looking beyond technology
 a thesis by linnéa carlsson a doctoral student in informatics specializing in work integrated learning examines this phenomenon and precisely points out that its not just about machines and digital technologythe human factor is crucial.
 the thesis explores how companies navigate between industry 4.0 and entirely technologydriven efficiency and the emerging industry 5.0 where humans and the environment are increasingly in focus. the result? an insight that technological progress is not just about the digital but also about the social.
 its about looking beyond the technology. shaping the new digital era is also about shaping relationships understanding common goals and breaking down old structures explains linnéa carlsson.
 three social aspects are crucial
 the thesis is based on studies of several mediumsized industrial companies. interviews with managers and leaders such as production managers and operations managers have been conducted along with group discussions involving personnel like operators. the results highlight three key factors and social aspects that influence how companies adapt to new technology. these aspects involve
 formalizing a shared understanding
 what emerges is the importance of pausing and reflecting on why one is digitizing.
 theres a sense of must that we must digitize to keep up and the purpose and goals of digitization arent always clear says linnéa carlsson.
 she suggests that creating a common understanding and breaking down hierarchies will be crucial for a smooth transition phase for companies. additionally speaking the same language is important for comprehension. discussing and clarifying how the implementation will impact the company and its various departments are essential.
 each companys journey into the digital era is unique. its about understanding and reshaping the companys own ways of working and thinking says linnéa carlsson.
 she argues that the organizational structure can be a hindrance and when introducing new technology the organizational boundaries become less significant and may need to change.
 highlights the human dimension
 i hope that my results can serve as a basis for discussion and reflection for managers and leaders. my experience is that often the value of social aspects is overlooked. its about adapting the business after rather than to says linnéa.
 i also hope that the thesis can contribute to creating a deeper understanding of how industrial digitization can benefit from human aspects and that its a prerequisite for success.
 a postdoc is waiting
 for the thesis social aspects of strategizing industrial digitalization
 contact linnéa carlsson phd in informatics specializing in work integrated learning university west linnea.carlsson@hv.se   46 70183 51 99
 the new programme international mechanical engineering attracts many students
 the new bachelor programme in international mechanical engineering is very popular and for the first semester there are 43 new students registered on the programme.
 the bachelor in international mechanical engineering programme 3 years at university west is very popular and most of the new students are international.
 the broad relevant studies create mechanical engineers with great skills ready for the industrys demands. that is what makes this programme so unique. after graduation the students will be well prepared for work or further studies in integrated systems.
 big data additive manufacturing electric vehicles lightweight components and advanced materials have created a new frontier for incoming mechanical engineers. now successful engineers need knowledge of manufacturing processes materials science robotics and automation electric vehicles and supply chain management.
 it is very flattering that 43 students are registered to the programme for 2022 but maybe not so surprising.
 we are really happy with the response. our new programme includes courses in several fields robotics automation logistics materials science and manufacturing engineering and that has been in my opinion the key to success. the future engineers know that being versatile and well prepared in multidisciplinary engineering fields is what will open them the doors to future working opportunities says asun valiente programme manager.
 this week the students have started arriving at university west and everyone seems positive and excited before the start of the semester. romain ludovic julie canelle and maxime are new students and they are all from france. it is the first time they are in sweden and the spirit is high. they look forward to the first lecture and introduction days at university west.
 we are very motivated and look forward to the studies at university west. it is important to have a good education for the future  says romain.
 another student is alfiya from turkey. she has just arrived in trollhättan and is also very excited about the new programme.
 i chose this program because i want to become a demanded industrial engineer and i believe that sweden and the university west in particular are the best places to implement my plan she says.
 the total sum granted by the knowledge foundation is sek 74 million. in addition the companies will contribute with around sek 60 million. together with the universitys own funds this adds up to a total of just over sek 145 million.
 further develop cuttingedge expertise in additive manufacturing
 a newly recruited senior lecturer that will study how recycling of lithiumion batteries for electric cars can be carried out with the help of automation solutions.
 another project will investigate whether engines in heavy vehicles can become more environmentally friendly by coating components using thermal spraying.
 to receive funding each year a business plan must be approved by the knowledge foundation. it presents the desired investments in primus three core areas production processes production systems and industrial workintegrated learning iail.
 in 2022 university west will enter its fifth year of a period of 10 years. it is very exciting to closely follow the universitys work to strengthen its profiling and see how they increasingly use our entire program portfolio strategically says eva schelin ceo of the knowledge foundation.
 contact lennart malmsköld programme manager primus university west 072160 01 53
 the relationship between pain inflammation and adhd in children and adolescents
 new clinical study investigates the relationship between pain inflammation and adhd in children and adolescents
 children and adolescents with adhd often suffer from pain. however there are few studies on this. it is also known that many children and adolescents with adhd also have socalled inflammatory diseases such as asthma or allergies. a new hypothesis for a possible causal connection between inflammation pain and adhd could in the future lead to new treatment methods for adhd in children and adolescents.
 coexisting pain and somatic diseases are very little studied in children and young people with adhd. patients often seek help for different symptoms from different doctors in different disciplines says professor nóra kerekes at university west who is the leader of the project pain inflammation in psychiatric conditions pipco.
 currently there are no established screening forms to draw attention to psychiatric symptoms when examining patients with pain conditions in a somatic care environment. there is neither any founded knowledge about offering patients with adhd or other neurodevelopmental disabilities adapted treatments for pain conditions.
 professor nóra kerekes at university west.
 a new clinical study
 now therefore a new clinical study is being launched which adds a holistic perspective to the treatment of young people with adhd. recruitment of children and adolescents who newly receive an adhd diagnosis at queen silvias childrens hospital gothenburg or nu healthcare uddevalla is ongoing.
 the theoretical basis of the project is the hypothesis that was published in fall 2021 and indicates that inflammation may be the underlying reason for increased pain in children and adolescents with adhd.
 want to contribute with preventive measures
 her project shifts attention to an important aspect of health care such as being able to see the whole person somatic and psychological problems together.
 the goal of the new study is to investigate whether the diagnosis of adhd can be supplemented with biological inflammatory markers in saliva or feces in children.
 if the theory that ongoing inflammation is the basis for increased pain in children and adolescents with adhd is confirmed treating the inflammation could prevent the development of chronic pain disorders in adulthood.
 my hope is that the projects results can contribute to the development of new treatment strategies for children and young people with adhd which can lead to increased quality of life for them.
 contact nóra kerekes professor in medical science psychiatry university west nora.kerekes@hv.se 46 739 01 34 03
 more information about the pipco project pain and inflammation in psychiatric conditions  pipco
 kerekes n. lundqvist s. schubert hjalmarsson e. torinsson naluai å. kantzer a. k.  knez r. 2022. the associations between adhd pain inflammation and quality of life in children and adolescentsa clinical study protocol. plos one 179 e0273653.
 kerekes n. sanchézpérez a. m.  landry m. 2021. neuroinflammation as a possible link between attentiondeficithyperactivity disorder adhd and pain. medical hypotheses 157 110717.
 as a university student you have both rights and obligations. you must take personal responsibility for your studies and for reading the information that you need in order to carry out your studies.the purpose of this student handbook is to provide accessible information about the relevant regulations for following an education at university west. the handbook does not contain the original text of statutes and similar regulations.
 the student handbook contents
 the uddevalla symposium
 irene bernhard has been project manager coordinator and member of the scientific committee as well as the organizational committee.
 report 2020 23 years of the uddevalla symposium 19982020.pdf
 see our film summing up the years 19982020 on youtube.
 see our slide show uddevalla symposium 20 years.
 see our film about the uddevalla symposium 20 years on youtube.
 the universitys new hybrid teaching rooms enable teaching to be more flexible
 new hybrid teaching rooms enable teaching to be more flexible
 university wests new hybrid teaching rooms have considerably reduced the difference between studying on campus and studying remotely. with new technology comes opportunities for teaching and interacting in more flexible creative ways.
 this is a further step in our efforts to make our courses accessible for many more people says lars johansson head of the division of educational development and study counselling.
 in university wests recently inaugurated hybrid teaching rooms students learning remotely and on campus can communicate on the same terms. photography andreas borg
 this week six new hybrid teaching rooms were opened at university west. they are part of the universitys investment in hybrid teaching whereby students can be taught in different ways  on campus wholly online or using a blend of both options.
 the new teaching rooms make use of advanced technology to give all students a comparable experience irrespective of where they are. microphones in the ceiling multiple screens on the walls and smart control systems mean that everyone can hear and see each other and can be involved in the course on the same conditions.
 weve done a few test lectures in the hybrid rooms and im really pleased says maria erlandsson who teaches on the socialpsychiatric care programme offered in both trollhättan and at campus västervik. the students feel they can communicate with each other and with teachers more naturally.
 two campuses  one class
 maria and her teaching colleagues have also been able to test out some new educational approaches in their teaching.
 the technology opens up some entirely new possibilities and its particularly valuable for those of us with students on two campuses says maria. teaching in the hybrid rooms helps make the students feel more that they are part of the same class rather than there being an us and them situation.
 its also easier to bring in external lecturers when there is high quality audiovisual provision. and if i get a cold i can decide to teach from my computer at home. in the future well be able to let students have that flexibility too.
 we will develop our educational methods and our courses as we discover new ways of using the technology. and alongside that we will monitor what the students feel about it and evaluate new setups.
 the new hybrid rooms project has been an opportunity for several of the universitys units to work together in a new way. the it department campus support and the ict and media support department ims have taken an integrative approach to everything from technological solutions to furnishings.
 the project has been led by imss learning technologist erik malmsköld who has put a lot of effort into ensuring there is widespread buyin within the university says johansson. we also decided to run a number of pilot projects and have had valuable feedback from those from teachers and students.
 im convinced that this way of working will enhance our ability to create a good model for flexible teaching.
 more hybrid teaching rooms planned
 the universitys six new hybrid teaching rooms can accommodate between 20 and 120 people. there are plans to build another two hybrid teaching rooms and a number of hybrid group spaces for 48 people by 2022.
 this investment in new teaching environments falls within our major infrastructure project says johansson. its part of ensuring the campus is developed to maintain the universitys attractiveness in the future.
 our aim where possible is for teaching to be accessible in a more flexible way. that allows us to make higher education accessible for more people.
 contact lars johansson university west
 further information about the design of the hybrid rooms  in swedish
 the universitys responsibilities and work
 the university must investigate suspicions of discrimination and harassment and take measures to put an end to any misconduct. there must also be preventive and promotional work with active measures.
 as an education provider the higher education institution must take active measures in the areas of admissions and recruitment examinations and assessments the study environment studies and parenthood as well as teaching methods and organisation. read more on the equality ombudsmans website.
 as an employer the university must take active measures in the areas of working conditions parenthood and work salaries and terms of employment recruitment and promotion as well as education and skills development. read more on the equality ombudsmans website.
 based on university wests guidelines to prevent harassment sexual harassment reprisals and victimisation see link below each work unit works with active measures which include annually mapping analyzing addressing and following up risks of discrimination. the work is documented and reported in connection with the annual report.
 the vicechancellor is responsible for the universitys overall work environment management which includes equal opportunities. each work unit and department manager has delegated responsibility for the work environment within their organisation. this includes preventive work and the obligation to investigate and take action in the event of suspicion of discrimination harassment and victimisation.
 all employees and students have a responsibility to treat each other with respect and work for an environment free from discrimination harassment sexual harassment and victimisation. this responsibility includes pointing out any irregularities that come to everyones attention.
 the worlds top experts in thermal spraying meet at university west this fall
 thermal spraying is used to add new surface layers to components so that they get better properties or new functions. photo stefan björklund university west.
 hopefully we can attract more european universities and companies to participate now that the conference is organized in europe. we also aim to attract students doctoral students and postdocs to the summer school in thermal spraying that we are organizing the day before the ts4e conference.
 gives components better properties
 thermal spraying is used to add new surface layers to components so that they get better properties or new functions. the technology is used in new production repair and maintenance.
 this is how thermal spraying works
 thermal spraying can be simply described as spray painting a component. you use a heated material in powder form that is pushed at high speed onto the surface you want to coat. when it lands on the surface the powder particles are deformed and spread like a thin pancake which then solidifies. you can spray several layers of pancakes and then build up a new stronger surface step by step.
 common materials are metal metal alloys composites ceramics and polymers. the powdered material can also be mixed with a liquid and used for socalled suspension spraying.
 contact shrikant joshi professor of thermal spraying west university
 more about the ts4e conference
 financial support for the department of economics and it
 thermal coating makes diesel engines more efficient
 even such small differences can be valuable in reducing the climate impact of diesel vehicles says wellington uczak de goes who is a new doctor in production engineering at university west.
 as long as diesel engines are still being used it is important that the fuel is used as efficiently as possible. there is currently no alternative fuel that delivers energy comparable to conventional oilbased fuels explains wellington.
 a thermal barrier coating on the top of the piston reduces energy loss in the diesel engine. this means that the fuel is burned more efficiently and fuel consumption is reduced which in turn leads to lower emissions of greenhouse gases that are harmful to the climate.
 wellingtons results show that fuel consumption could be reduced by 0.7 per cent. he provides an interesting numerical example to show that even relatively small interventions like this can make a difference.
 there are currently around 2.4 million dieselpowered vehicles in sweden. if their fuel consumption can be reduced by just 0.7 per cent that would be equivalent to there being around 17000 fewer diesel vehicles on the road.
 wellington has tested and evaluated several different coating materials and two spraying techniques. the focus of his work was to explore the relationships between the process parameters coating microstructure thermal properties and performance.
 by combining different materials and spraying techniques different effects on the microstructure and properties of the coating can be achieved. the techniques i have used are atmospheric plasma spraying aps and suspension plasma spraying sps.
 strong interest from vehicle manufacturers
 they have followed my work with great interest all the way and have provided valuable feedback. they also gave me access to their diesel engines to conduct engine experiments.
 thermal spraying is generally a simple and inexpensive technique for the coating of components. with the relatively new sps technology the manufacturing industry has gained a wide range of possibilities and applications.
 for wellington new challenges now await at höganäs which is a global supplier of metal powders for among other things additive manufacturing and thermal spray coating.
 read wellingtons thesis thermal barrier coatings for diesel engines
 thermal spray  level 2
 an axial feed capable atmospheric plasma spray aps system providing the highest thermal energy among all ts variants.
 a high velocity air fuel hvaf spray system relying on very high kinetic energy to compensate for low temperature processing.
 the above combination lends a strong versatility to the groups processing capabilities that are available at only few ts groups worldwide. the spray facilities are also complemented by a range of allied equipment for process monitoring coating characterisation and performance assessment in diverse environments.
 functionalities addressed
 the ts group is very well connected nationally and internationally. being the best equipped thermal spray laboratory in an academic environment within sweden has largely been responsible for facilitating a large collaboration network that has included leading thermal spray groups as well as companies both within sweden and abroad. some key collaborators in each of these categories are listed below merely as an example
 chalmers university of technology swedenuniversity of modena and reggio emilia italyipp czechiatechnical university  chemnitz germanystony brook university usaforschungszentrum jülich germanyindian institutes of technology  bombay kanpur ropar indiauniversity of stuttgart germanytampere university of technology finlanduniversity of turku finlandmax iv  european spallation source sweden
 pratt  whitney  usasafran  francesaint gobain  franceman energy solutions  denmarktreibacher  austriaoerlikon metco  switzerlandgkn aerospacesiemenshöganässandvikandritzabbscaniavolvo pentavolvo trucksvolvo carsac flobytselifesize
 aces  synergythe project takes a comprehensive approach on sustainability to provide a pathway that could contribute to the climate target through development of advanced thermal spray ts coatings for application in diverse sectors.university west  aces  synergy hv.se
 greenbatthe industrial adoption of allsolidstatelithiumbatteries asslbs is hampered by cumbersome manufacturing routes currently attempted for fabrication of electrodes and the electrolyte. the greenbat project aims to utilize novel singlestep manufacturing routes involving plasma spraying and laser directed energy deposition to replace multistep processing of individual asslb constituents. subsequently sequential processing to consolidate components into a full cell will also be explored.swedish participation in the mera.net initiated project greenbat  vinnova
 coatings for enhanced functionality of light alloysenhancing the surfaces of the light alloys through surface engineering and advanced coatings could result in radical improvements in their functionality while reducing the overall cost thereby leading the way to their widespread implementation. coatings produced by thermal spray ts have some distinct advantages over other methods as they can be deposited over a wide thickness range onto components with complex geometries and at comparatively lower costs. the aim of this project is to develop advanced coatings by ts for enhanced functionality of light alloys.coatings for enhanced functionality of light alloys  vinnova
 the thermal spray group at university west  is the only one of its kind within the academic environment in sweden. the technology is typically used to deposit coatings for lifeextension of components or to impart special functions on their surface. the group works with numerous industrial partners and is internationally wellrecognized.
 thermal spraying is a process wherein a material traditionally fed in the form of a powder is heated to a molten or semimolten state in a hightemperature highvelocity zone and the resulting particle or droplet is propelled onto the surface to be coated. the range of materials that can be deposited include metals alloys ceramics plastics and composites and can be built up in the thickness range of 20 microns to several mm over a large area and at a high deposition rates.
 the unique spray facilities available in the group comprise an axial feed capable plasma spray system and a highvelocity airfuel hvaf unit that enable the most appropriate thermal spray route to be adopted depending on the material to be coated. due to the huge spread of materials that can be sprayed the coating properties can be tailored to meet the functional requirements of a wide spectrum of applications relevant to gas turbines diesel engines bearings journals pumps compressors etc. as well as key components required in oil  gas steel pulp  paper industries.
 hard face coatings can be produced using cobaltfree materials
 kaveh torkashvand doctor in production engineering university west
 extremely proud to host the conference ts4e
 mohit gupta shrikant joshi and nicolaie markocsan professors in thermal spray university west
 wellington uczak de goes doctor in production engineering university west
 the thermal spray team university west
 thematic leader  thermal spray
 thermal spray day
 thermal spray day  22 may 2024
 welcome to the thermal spray day in trollhättan and learn how thermal spray could make your processes and products more sustainable. the day will include presentations from thermal spray industry in sweden as well as an exhibition of thermal spray products and services.
 everyone who is interested in thermal spray whether just curious or a professional is welcome and will find this day interesting network and find new coating solutions service providers and customers. the event is free of cost to participate.
 date 22 may 2024 starts with a network dinner at saab car museum the evening 21th may
 location företagens hus innovatum district and production technology center  innovatum district
 08300900   registration and coffee
 09301000    equipment for thermal spray andreas pick oerlikon metco
 10301100    feedstock materials for diverse applications wellington uczak de goes höganäs ab
 11001130    wire arc spraying and spray  fuse mats ström castolin
 11301200    need of thermal spray coatings in the industry jarkko kiilakoski paroc
 13001330    thermal spray applications in swedish industry olav norheim tse
 14001410    thermal spray course for professionals in autumn 2024 mohit gupta university west
 14151600    exhibition in parallel with guided tour of ptc including thermal spray lab fika and networking
 register now
 registration open until 5th may
 registration is free of charge but noshow for registered participants will be charged with a fee of 500 sek. registration is transferable to another member in the organisation.
 thermal spraying lab
 in thermal spraying processes melted or heated materials usually powder or wire are sprayed onto a surface to form a protective coating. a jet propels droplets of melted materials towards a substrate where the droplets flatten and solidify rapidly.
 available thermal spraying methods
 plasma sprayingin plasma spraying the material to be deposited is introduced into a plasma jet emanating from a plasma torch. the heat is extreme and because of this the method is suitable for spraying ceramic materials. plasma spraying forms porous coatings which for example can protect against heat.
 flame sprayingflame spraying uses the heat from the combustion of a fuel gas usually acetylene or propane with oxygen to melt the coating material. it is suitable for spraying lower melting point materials since flame temperatures are comparatively low. it forms porous coatings.
 highvelocity oxyfuel spraying hvofin the hvofprocess a mixture of gaseous or liquid fuel and oxygen is fed into a combustion chamber where it is ignited and burned continuously. the resultant hot gas emanates through a nozzle and travels through a straight section. a powder feed stock is injected into the gas stream. the gas and the sprayed particles reach very high speeds sometimes up to 1000 meter per second. because of this the kinetic energy of the particles is very high and the resultant coating on the substrate becomes extremely dense with very high adhesion. hvof coatings are excellent protection against corrosion.
 wire arc sprayingin the wire arc spraying process two consumable metal wires are fed independently into a spray gun. these wires are then charged and an arc is generated between them. the heat from this arc melts the incoming wire which is then entrained in an air jet from the gun. the molten material is deposited onto the substrate. wire arc spraying is a relatively simple and inexpensive method and it has wide uses.
 there is a whole range of measuring equipment in the thermal spraying lab. the two most important are
 feedstock particle scannerthis equipment scans particles before spraying. it measures their size and the proportions of particles of different sizes. it is also possible to determine their shape. they could be round oval or maybe angular. all these factors are of great importance for the quality of the resultant coating.
 inflight particle measurement systemthis system measures temperature velocity and size of the inflight particles during spraying. when various parameters of the process are changed it is possible to see how this affects the particles during spraying.
 measurements of sprayed components are done in the nearby material lab.
 thermal spraying parttime campus tks600
 the course contents are
 principles of different types of thermal spray processes
 fundamental mechanisms of coating formation
 overview of equipment feedstock materials coating properties coating characterisation and applications
 thermomechanical processing of nibase superalloys thermechpro
 due to the high temperatures and extreme mechanical loads encountered in the hot sections of aero engines the use of advanced superalloys is required. these alloys are very complex making them both expensive and difficult to process. as problems in the manufacturing process can result in costly deviations as well as undesired variations in the final material properties it is essential to develop a profound understanding of the relationships between process microstructure and properties. the project aims to address this issue for the newly developed superalloy haynes 282 which has rapidly become an important material for aero engine applications. through systematic studies of the effects of different forging parameters and subsequent heat treatments on the final mechanical properties critical phenomena and relationships will be identified and described in models.
 thermodynamics and heat transfer mathematical formulation and analytic solution parttime campus tdv200
 the course addresses thermodunamics and basic heat transfer with mathematical formulation and analytical solution. it will give a good understanding of the physics underlying the studied phenomena and training on problem formulation modelling and analytical solving and results discussion. the course covers following
 basic concepts of thermodynamics
 properties of substances including in twophase regions
 steady and transient heat conduction
 natural and forced convection
 radiation heat transfer
 first law of thermodynamics for open and closed systems
 second law of thermodynamics  application in cyclic processes
 sustainability policy documents
 our sustainable development policy formulates overarching sustainability goals and the sustainable development strategy identifies nine target areas with an overarching goal and subgoals. particularly prioritised areas where the university has longterm sustainability goals are climate transition and gender equality.
 the universitys policy for sustainable development
 offer highquality education that develops students ability to contribute to sustainable development based on a scientific approach.
 staff and students are encouraged and given the conditions to contribute to sustainable development.
 collaborate with partners who work together with us for sustainable development and initiate collaboration on sustainability.
 integrate social ecological and economic sustainability into the universitys supporting business processes and premises
 you can read the policy in its entirety here.
 we are the leading ail higher education institution for lifelong learning and sustainable development
 the students are attractive in the labour market equipped for lifelong learning and are driving actors for sustainable social development
 sustainable development is an integral part of the universitys activities. here you can read about vision goals and strategies.
 a work and study environment free from genderbased vulnerability harassment violations and sexual harassmentan equal distribution of power resources and opportunitiesgender equal education and doctoral educationsupporting processes and tools to enable change
 here you can read the plan for gender mainstreaming 20232025 in its entirety.
 objectives for business travel
 impact goalsthe universitys business trips must be carried out with as little environmental and climate impact as possible.
 timed goals
 emissions of carbon dioxide from business travel planes buses cars trains are to be reduced by at least 25 percent per annual workforce between 2018 and 2025.
 emissions of carbon dioxide from business travel planes buses cars trains must be reduced by at least 30 percent per annual workforce between 2018 and 2030.
 followupbusiness travel in 2023 compared to 2018 in percent
 total 36 kg co2 per annual workforce compared to 2018 24 of total emissions
 business travel by mode of transport in 2023 compared to 2018 as a percentage
 aviation  29 kg co2 per annual workforce 24 kg total emissionscar travel  65 kg co2 per annual workforce 59 kg total emissionsbus  54 kg co2 per annual workforce compared to 2018 45 kg total emissionstrain makes up only 3 kg out of 197374 kg total. in kilometres train travel has decreased by 23 per fulltime equivalent compared to 2018.
 air travel gave rise to 89 percent of all climate impact from business travel in 2023.
 support for sustainable travel link to the staff portal login required
 here you will find the rules for business travel link to the staff portal login required
 objectives for consumption and resource use targets
 the universitys consumption and use of resources contribute to good working conditions and reduced negative environmental impact.
 timebound environmental and climate goals
 the universitys procurement purchasing and use of materials must be climateneutral or climatenegative by 2045 at the latest with emissions as close to zero as possible.
 reduction of carbon dioxide emissions by 30 percent per fulltime equivalent by 2030 compared to base year 2024 in the following areasit productsfurniturecatering
 the proportion of purchases with sustainability labels will be as follows by 2030catering 60 percent organic eu organickrav or equivalent and still 100 percent fair trade with fairtradeequivalent for coffee and tea.it products 100 percent sustainabilitylabelled computers and monitors tco certified or equivalentfurniture 100 percent sustainabilitylabelled ecolabel nordic swan möbelfakta or equivalent
 results will be followed up from 2024 onwards.
 this is how university west works with sustainable purchasing link to the staff portal login required
 objectives for waste and material use targets
 impact goalsthe universitys handling of materials and waste must be circular and provide good conditions for students and staff to take individual responsibility to act sustainably.
 wasteimplement a new routine for waste sorting at the university by 2025.develop metrics for residual waste by 2026.
 use of materials100 percent takeback of it products by 2030.50 percent reuse of divested furniture by 2030.
 objectives for operational electricity
 impact goalsthe universitys energy use must be climateneutral and efficient.
 consumption of operating electricity must be reduced by at least 15 per cent compared to base year average of 20142015
 own production of renewable energy will increase by at least 100 percent compared to 2023.
 followupoperating electricity on campus in 2023 compared to 20142015
 total 9.6 kwhper sqm 9.8 kwhper fulltime worker  28.7 kwh
 how do we work with sustainability?
 sustainability must be integrated into all our processes. environmental management and equal opportunities are the areas we focus extra on.
 guideline for work with equal opportunities
 vicechancellors decision 12 september 2023effective october 1 2023case number hv 2023352
 the purpose of the universitys system and structure for equal opportunities is to create a study and work environment where everyone works on equal terms. equal opportunities include diversity equality and accessibility aspects. by creating structure and transparency a systematic approach to the social dimension of sustainable development is developed.
 this work is an important part of the universitys quality work towards our vision and common goals and which affects the entire organisation and includes equal opportunities and equality for all students and staff. the systematic work shall contribute to equal opportunities rights and obligations for all individuals applicants students and employees regardless of gender gender identity age sexual orientation ethnicity social cultural or religious background or disability.
 the work to create inclusion and equal opportunities for all is based on international and national goals and regulations as well as the universitys own vision goals and internal regulations. agenda 2030 is an international action plan with goals for the transition to a sustainable society for people planet and prosperity and encompasses three dimensions of sustainable development economic social and environmental.
 the work on the social dimension is regulated by laws ordinances and the governments annual appropriation letter.  section 5 of the higher education act reads higher education institutions shall promote sustainable development in their activities which means that present and future generations are ensured a healthy and good environment economic and social welfare and justice. in the activities of higher education institutions equality between women and men must always be observed and promoted. other laws and ordinances that the university must comply with are for example the work environment act the discrimination act and the ordinance 2001526 on the state authorities responsibility for the implementation of disability policy. the states core values also lay the foundation for sustainable development by for example upholding democratic values through respect for the equal value of all people and for the freedom and dignity of the individual the mission to promote sustainable development that leads to a good environment for present and future generations and to work to ensure that all people can achieve participation and equality in society.
 university wests vision for a more sustainable world we are an active societal actor that together with the outside world creates knowledge and makes it available to more people shows that the university has high ambitions for the work with sustainable development which is also reflected in the universitys core values generous inclusive offensive and crazy enough. sustainability permeates the business and is visible in both goals and strategies.
 2. preventive work
 to create a study and work environment where everyone works on equal terms longterm and structured work with systematic followup and continuous improvements is required. the nondiscrimination act defines the work of preventing discrimination and promoting equal rights and opportunities at work regardless of the grounds for discrimination for active measures. in short it is about identifying and eliminating risks of this happening.
 the establishment of guidelines procedures and other necessary governing documents provides a clear framework and ensures systematic work on work environment and equal opportunities issues. good conditions for this work are created through information for new students and information on the student web and the staff portal employee appraisals introductory training for new employees systematic training for managers and other important groups as well as through various surveys analyses and followups.
 within the framework of the universitys regular work in all processes it is to ensure a study and work environment where everyone works on equal terms. this means that work to create inclusion and equal opportunities as well as education providers and employers must continuously take place in the daytoday operations. to support the planning work there are processes internal guidelines rules and procedures that ensure equal treatment and inclusion.
 all ongoing work in all the universitys processes must be carried out in such a way that all students or employees have equal opportunities rights and obligations. the universitys operational management system includes annual followup and discussion in the universitys management group on continued development in connection with the strategy day for sustainable development.
 the work will take place continuously in four stages in five areas and based on all seven grounds for discrimination. these are described in more detail in the next section. the implementation includes working with measures linked to identified risks in the business based on work environment and equal opportunities aspects. to support implementation there are procedures for equal opportunities work and templates for risk assessment. the organisation conducts risk assessments analyses causes and implements measures linked to decided universitywide and local priorities. plans are drawn up continuously during the year but are followed up in connection with annual reporting and strategic discussions. the systematics of the equal opportunities work is evaluated once a year in connection with the managements review during the strategic discussion in the universitys management group.
 4. evaluate investigate and follow up
 equal opportunities work is carried out systematically by following the four steps linked to active measures to carry out preventive and promotional work1 investigate 2 analyze 3 remedy 4 evaluate and follow up.
 risks of discrimination against students and staff and any obstacles to equal rights and opportunities are investigated in several different ways. the surveys focus on the risks of discrimination against employees and students according to the discrimination acts legal requirement for active measures sfs 2016828.
 for employees including employed doctoral students
 salaries and terms of employment
 recruitment and promotion
 reconciliation of work and parenthood
 for students including doctoral students
 admission and recruitment procedure
 teaching methods and organisation of education
 examinations and assessments of student performance
 opportunity to combine studies with parenthood
 the work of identifying risks and analysing based on the seven grounds of the discrimination act is done through annual followups in the form of for example
 surveys work environment survey equal opportunities survey doctoral student barometer
 followup and analysis of received student complaints and student cases
 analysis of programme evaluation
 followup and analysis together with the student health service and coordinators for students with disabilities
 followup of incoming cases reports and incidents.
 to ensure responsibility timetable and communication regarding the followups that are made there is a followup schedule hv 2023585.
 5. develop and improve
 followup measures and evaluation of equal opportunities are reported to the universitys management team at the annual strategy day in accordance with the fourth step evaluate and followup linked to the work with active measures. on the basis of analyses and evaluations the necessary universitywide measures are decided on at operational and strategic level to promote a level playing field and reduce the risks of discrimination.
 the proposed measures are documented and followed up continuously to ensure that they are implemented effectively. at the next years strategy day the results of these measures will be reported back to ensure transparency and accountability in accordance with legal requirements.
 in line with the requirements of the discrimination act the structure content and systematics of the work with equal opportunities are evaluated once a year in connection with the managements review during the strategic discussion in the universitys management group. this ensures that our working methods are continuously adapted and improved to promote an equal and inclusive study and work environment and to meet the statutory requirements.
 results from followup measures and evaluation of equal opportunities are communicated to relevant stakeholders in order to make the work visible and feedback in a transparent manner. communication and dissemination of information is an important key to creating effective and visible equal opportunities work. communication helps to create inclusive environments and cultures and is part of creating changes in behavior and expression. it is therefore particularly important that communication itself is inclusive and that good examples as well as difficulties and challenges are disseminated and discussed.
 within the university systematic equal opportunities work is carried out at different levels and in different forms. the responsibility follows both internal delegation regulations and legal requirements. the work units carry out annual surveys analyses and measures in their activities to increase gender equality and reduce the risks of discrimination. it is the responsibility of all managers to prevent discrimination and to act and investigate the risks of discrimination. all managers also have a responsibility to create an atmosphere of trust and participation where employees and students are engaged and given the opportunity to make their voices heard influence and change.
 7.1 principalthe vicechancellor has the ultimate responsibility for promoting equal opportunities for all employees and all students within the universitys operations. the responsibility is thus divided into two parts and entails both employer responsibility and responsibility as an education provider. this includes but is not limited to increasing gender equality and reducing the risks of discrimination.
 the vicechancellor creates the conditions through decisions in accordance with the universitys rules of procedure and the vicechancellors delegation of authority. within the universitys management team an annual cycle for strategic issues is carried out where sustainable development including gender equality and equal opportunities issues forms a theme for followup and strategic discussions. regular followups according to a special schedule see appendix 1 provide a basis for discussion prior to strategic and operational decisions.
 7.2 head of departmentlike the vicechancellor heads of department have a dual responsibility  both as an employer and as an education provider.
 as education providers heads of department are responsible for ensuring that all students have equal opportunities and opportunities in education. this includes implementing measures to reduce the risk of discrimination and promote equal treatment in teaching methods and organisation examinations and assessments study environment and the opportunity to combine studies with parenthood. heads of department are also responsible for ensuring that the gender equality and equal opportunities perspective is part of the content design and implementation of the programmes within the framework of the sustainability perspective.
 7.3 university directorthe university directors employer responsibility includes implementing measures that reduce the risk of discrimination and promote equal opportunities and equality.   this includes ensuring equal treatment in working conditions pay and terms of employment recruitment and promotion skills development and training and the opportunity to combine work with parenthood. the work focuses on promoting an equal distribution and representation of different groups in the management team and internal bodies. it also means actively working to ensure that all employees have equal conditions for qualifications and includes measures to promote equal treatment in for example the distribution of meritorious tasks.
 the university director is responsible for creating conditions planning and following up that the study environment in the form of infrastructure and support functions for education is correctly dimensioned and creates equal conditions and conditions for all students. the administrations department heads are responsible for staffing and planning for their employees within their areas of responsibility. they are also responsible for ensuring that employees have the right skills knowledge and conditions to perform their tasks in an inclusive and equal way.
 7.4 head of student support library and educational development sbipthe head of sbip is responsible for implementing measures that promote gender equality reduce the risk of discrimination and ensure equal opportunities in working conditions pay and terms of employment recruitment and promotion skills development and training and the opportunity to combine work with parenthood. the work focuses on promoting equal distribution and equal opportunities in the appointment of management teams and internal bodies as well as merit in the distribution of meritorious tasks.
 furthermore the head of sbip is responsible for creating conditions planning and following up that sbip with its support functions are correctly dimensioned and create equal conditions and conditions for all students. department managers are responsible for staffing and planning for their employees and ensure that employees have the right skills knowledge and conditions for the tasks.
 processes that contribute to equal opportunities and that are systematically followed up evaluated developed and documented are study guidance support for students with special needs writing guidance and other student support linked to the library as well as processes to promote digital competence development and teaching and learning in higher education
 7.5 heads of departmentall heads of department have an employer responsibility and must systematically implement measures that promote gender equality and equal opportunities and reduce the risk of discrimination in working conditions pay and terms of employment recruitment and promotion skills development and training and the opportunity to combine gainful employment with parenthood. the work includes for example informing investigating conditions and creating opportunities for skills development as well as ensuring that all employees have career opportunities on equal terms so that gender equality increases in the workplace. planning and followup take place via workforce planning discussions and annual performance appraisals.
 heads of department in the institutions are also responsible for receiving and handling complaints that cannot be resolved through direct communication between interested parties and for documenting any risks of discrimination.
 7.6 all staff and studentsin order to promote equal opportunities it is crucial that both staff and students are given the opportunity to actively make their voices heard influence and change. the commitment of all parties is an important success factor. furthermore all staff and students have a responsibility to follow the rules guidelines procedures that exist and act in a fair and inclusive manner. it is important that everyone is aware that they have a role in identifying and reporting any discrimination they see or experience.
 teachers have a special responsibility to participate in competence development measures and an obligation to follow internal rules guidelines and action plans to ensure and develop study environments so that all students can study on equal terms. the work includes contributing to improvement in the event of identified shortcomings as well as measures to ensure that the gender equality and equal opportunities perspective is part of the content design and implementation of the education. programme directors have a special responsibility to monitor the issues from a programme perspective.
 7.7 coordinator for equal opportunities and gender equalitythe universitys equal opportunities coordinator has the role of coordinating initiating and running the universitys equal opportunities and gender equality work so that it takes place according to plan. the role includes
 coordinate the establishment of governing documents and procedures to promote equal opportunities and counteract discrimination
 conduct universitywide risk analyses in the area of equal opportunities and discrimination to identify and manage any shortcomings and risks
 follow up and evaluate the effects of initiatives and measures and report results to the universitys management and stakeholders
 be the convenor of the sustainability council together with the environmental coordinator
 offer support and resources to work units
 collaborate with department heads and human resources managers
 law monitoring and business intelligence
 respond to referrals and surveys related to equal opportunities and discrimination
 coordinate internal and external reviews of equal opportunities and discrimination
 be responsible for ensuring that information in the area is uptodate and appropriate
 prepare documentation plan and carry out the managements review at the universitys management groups strategy day for sustainable development.
 be part of relevant working groups in the area of equal opportunities and gender equality
 7.8 sustainability advicethe universitys sustainability council is a committee of the universitys management team and is led by the deputy vicechancellor. the sustainability council is responsible for preparing and analysing data from various sources including the followups that take place within the framework of the universitys quality system. based on the analyses carried out the sustainability council prepares proposals for development projects and improvement activities that are presented and discussed at the annual strategy day in sustainable development.
 as part of this the sustainability council works strategically to develop and anchor processes guidelines and working methods to develop the work within gender equality and equal opportunities throughout the university.
 the sustainability council consists of appointed management representatives from all work units student representatives as well as environmental coordinators and coordinators for equal opportunities and gender equality. the members of the sustainability council are responsible for anchoring and discussing equal opportunities issues within each work unitactivity. the deputy vicechancellor is responsible for dialogue and anchoring with the vicechancellor.
 vicechancellors decision 3 october 2023effective october 1 2023case number hv 2023351
 the purpose of the universitys environmental management work is to reduce the negative environmental impact and contribute positively to environmental improvement. the environmental management system provides a systematic approach to the ecological dimension of sustainable development. in this way it contributes to fulfilling university wests vision for a more sustainable world we are an active societal actor that together with the outside world creates knowledge and makes it available to more people.
 environmental work at government agencies is ultimately regulated by laws ordinances and the governments annual appropriation letter. the university is tasked with working for a better environment which is regulated by the higher education act according to which a healthy and good environment must be promoted. the ordinance on environmental management in the state sfs 2009 907 regulates that this must be done through a systematic approach.
 the environmental management system clarifies responsibilities and provides a systematic and structure for monitoring conditions and results. the followup should lead to the identification of developmentimprovement needs a plan for measures and feedback.
 ultimately the environmental management system must ensure that the universitys operations live up to the requirements set out in laws and ordinances.1 it shall also contribute to the development of activities in accordance with the management systems vision of contributing to a sustainable world as well as universitywide goals and strategies of which sustainable development is an integral part.
 the various parts of the environmental management system are described below. this is followed by a description of the responsibilities of different roles.
 the environmental management system describes a systematic approach to environmental impact according to an improvement cycle in order to contribute to sustainable development and achieve the national environmental quality objectives. it clarifies the organisation and responsibility for environmental work lists stakeholders who have requirements and expectations of the university specifies which areas are the universitys important sustainability aspects and thus extra important to work with and how followup and reporting of the work should take place.
 through training and information the staffs skills and awareness are continuously developed in their own work for example through competence development initiatives events online support linked to specific areas e.g.  purchasing business travel chemical handling.
 the environmental work is governed by an annual cycle that is linked to the overall strategic annual cycle. the annual cycle ensures that based on the environmental objectives development areas are identified prioritised responsibility for activities is allocated implemented and followed up.
 the implementation includes activities linked to achieving set goals to reduce environmental impact and activities to improve the systematics of environmental work.
 the organisation carries out planned activities based on assignments linked to decided universitywide and local priorities. plans are drawn up continuously during the year but are followed up in connection with annual reporting and strategic discussions.
 the systematics of environmental management work are evaluated once a year in connection with the managements review at the strategic discussion in the universitys management group.
 in the areas with the greatest environmental impact procedures have been established to support operations for example for waste management purchasing business travel and chemical management. the procedures are available on the universitys staff portal. incidents and deviations in relation to established routines and goals are documented and handled on an ongoing basis.
 environmental work is followed up at regular intervals and according to an established structure.
 annual followup of systematic environmental work
 followup and reporting of completed activities and results in
 the environmental report to the swedish environmental protection agency in connection with the annual report.
 compilation of deviations and incidents
 to ensure responsibility timetable and communication about the followups that are made there is a followup schedule.
 all followup and evaluation of the environmental work is reported to the universitys management team at the annual strategy days. on the basis of the results possible measures are decided on at operational and strategic level. the proposed measures are documented followed up and reported back at the latest at the following years strategy days.
 results from followup measures and evaluation of environmental management are communicated to relevant stakeholders with the aim of making the work visible and feedback in a transparent way to both relevant stakeholders and employees in general.
 wellfunctioning communication and dissemination of information is an important key to effective and visible environmental management work.
 within the university systematic environmental work is conducted at different levels and in different forms. the responsibility follows both internal delegation regulations and legal requirements.
 the work units are responsible for living up to current legal requirements and ensuring that the procedures established by the university to reduce negative environmental impact and contribute to positive environmental impact are followed. all managers must have knowledge of what the significant environmental aspectsrisks are in the part of the business they are responsible for and to take appropriate measures to reduce the negative environmental impact if necessary.
 7.1 principalthe vicechancellor has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the university complies with laws and other external requirements in the environmental area through an appropriate environmental management system. this responsibility includes creating conditions through decisions in accordance with the universitys rules of procedure and the vicechancellors delegation of authority.
 within the universitys management team an annual cycle for strategic issues is carried out where sustainable development including ecological sustainability constitutes a theme for followup and strategic discussions. regular followups according to a special schedule provide a basis for discussion prior to strategic and operational decisions.
 7.2 head of work unitthe work unit manager is responsible for creating conditions planning and following up the environmental work at the work unit level. incidents and deviations at the work unit are documented and followed up.
 the work unit manager appoints coordinators and other roles required by the environmental management system such as chemical manager and ensures that the appointed have the right skills knowledge and conditions for the assignment.
 the university director has a special responsibility for creating conditions planning and following up that infrastructure and support functions for environmental management work are correctly dimensioned.
 7.3 heads of departmentdepartment managers are responsible for ensuring that the departments employees are informed about and comply with existing rules guidelines and procedures e.g. rules for business travel. the work includes for example informing investigating conditions and identifying the need for skills development.
 7.4 employeesemployees are responsible for following rules guidelines procedures and otherwise contributing to environmental work. they also play an important role in alerting managers to things that are not working as intended within the environmental management system.
 7.5 environmental coordinatorthe universitys environmental coordinator has the role of coordinating and driving the universitys environmental management work so that it takes place according to plan. the duties include
 coordinate followup and write an annual environmental report to the swedish environmental protection agency.
 coordinate the establishment of governing documents and procedures
 be the convenor of the sustainability council together with the coordinator for equal opportunities and gender equality
 respond to referrals and surveys
 be part of relevant working groups in the environmental field e.g. chemicals group sustainability group for infrastructure.
 coordinate internal and external environmental audits
 conduct universitywide risk analyses in the environmental area.
 7.6 sustainability advicethe sustainability council is a committee of the universitys management team and is led by the deputy vicechancellor. it is responsible for preparing and analysing data from various sources including the followups that take place within the framework of the universitys quality system. based on the analyses made the sustainability council prepares proposals for development projects and improvement activities linked to sustainable development which are presented and discussed at the universitys management teams strategy days.
 as part of this the sustainability council works strategically to develop environmental management systems and reduce the negative environmental impact of the entire university.
 in addition to the deputy vicechancellor the sustainability council consists of management representatives from all work units student representatives as well as environmental coordinators and coordinators for equal opportunities and gender equality. the members of the sustainability council are responsible for anchoring and discussing environmental management issues within each work unitactivity. the deputy vicechancellor is responsible for dialogue and anchoring with the vicechancellor.
 7.7 infrastructure sustainability groupthe sustainability group for infrastructure coordinates that the university lives up to external and internal requirements regarding environmental and climate impact. the group has a particular focus on premises procurement and purchasing as well as it solutions.
 7.8 chemicals groupat the university there is a chemicals group that is a committee to the safety committee and has the task of coordinating the work with the universitys chemical management.
 the coordination assignment includes
 update universitywide chemical list and carry out annual review
 monitor that risk assessments are made and documented
 monitor the phaseoutsubstitution of hazardous substances
 provide support in the purchase of chemical substancesproducts
 establish procedures in the area
 ensure continuity and promote learning in the organization
 this years gkn scholarship recipient has been nominated
 additive manufacturing is revolutionizing the manufacturing industry. but with additive manufacturing also comes the need for new material knowledge not least in the case of alloy 718 which is one of the most widely used in the gas turbine industry. during additive manufacturing the alloy is exposed to high temperatures. this applies to both the additive process and the finishing. temperature and time are two parameters that are crucial for the final microstructure and it in turn is crucial for the material properties.
 instead of reallife testing chamara kumara performs simulations using modern computerbased models. there you can see how the microstructure changes depending on temperature and time.
 from the jurys motivation
 it is fair to say that he has made a significant contribution both directly and indirectly towards making university west the highest publishing organization in sweden on additive manufacturing of alloy 718. his work on microstructure modelling on additive manufacturing of alloy 718 is considered as a pioneering work in the field.
 therefore we believe that chamara kumara fulfills all the requirements for the gkn stipendium.
 thomas finds ways for people and computers to work more efficiently together
 a person can really only focus on one thing at a time. but using new technology in the future we will be able to take in much more information without being distracted. that will make it entirely possible to do several things at the same time.
 no one knows exactly how yet but people and computers will definitely work more efficiently together in the future says thomas pederson new professor of informatics at university west.
 congratulations on your second professorship
 thank you. thats right i have been a professor of computer science at malmö university for a few years and now i am also a professor of informatics at university west. starting this autumn i will divide my time between the department of business economics and it and the department of engineering science. this means that i have colleagues who work with both social sciences and technology. most of my work has taken a computer technology approach so it is a great advantage to be able to become part of a broader perspective.
 after working here for a year i am very positively surprised by the openness and supportive culture of the university. there is also a clear focus on strategic and realistic goals.
 as a teenager i played a lot with computers. programming did not attract me i was more interested in fonts layout creating music and other fun things to do on a computer. after high school i chose between studying computer science or graphic design. i ended up studying computer science at umeå university and when i started looking at the subject of humanmachine interaction i understood that i had found the right place for me.
 what are you currently focusing on most?
 in the autumn of 2022 the university will start a new programme focused on the development of the next generation of selfdriving vehicles. as the programme director i currently spend a lot of time preparing.
 in another exciting project we are investigating whether augmented reality can facilitate the production of wooden trusses. the fitters in one of deromes factories will test receiving instructions from ar glasses instead of from laptops and mobile phones and what benefits it can provide.
 i like to question why we do things in a certain way and i like to speculate on how we will solve different tasks in the future. but honestly personally i am not always so quick to stay on top of new technology. when an excited student friend showed me how to click on some of the worlds first websites in the early 90s it took six months before i realized what a huge impact the web would have for all of us.
 watch the video where thomas talks about how ar glasses can be useful in the manufacturing industry.
 contact thomas pederson
 thomas höjemo
 comparing the cdio standards with the work integrated learning certification
 thomas lundqvist annabella loconsole ingrid tano andreas de blanche
 flipping the data center network  increasing eastwest capacity using existing hardware
 h. robert h. andersson andreas de blanche thomas lundqvist
 increasing throughput of multiprogram hpc workloads  evaluating a smt coscheduling approach
 elias lundmark chris persson andreas de blanche thomas lundqvist
 disallowing sameprogram coschedules to improve efficiency in quadcore servers
 andreas de blanche thomas lundqvist
 terrible twins  a simple scheme to avoid bad coschedule
 a methodology for estimating coscheduling slowdowns due to memory bus contention on multicore nodes
 comparing the cdio educational framework with university wests wil certification do they complement each other?
 annabella loconsole thomas lundqvist ingrid tano andreas de blanche
 node sharing for increased throughput and shorter runtimes  an industrial coscheduling case study
 thingtothing electricity micro payments using blockchain technology
 thomas lundqvist andreas de blanche h. robert h. andersson
 initial formulation of why disallowing same program coschedules improves performance
 addressing characterization methods for memory contention aware coscheduling
 a lightweigh nonhierarchical file system navigation extension
 thomas winman  sustainable development
 professor thomas winman on sustainable development
 can you tell us a little about the school of business economics and it at university west?
 what exciting developments is your school working on around work integrated sustainable development?
 we are seeing the transition from being citizens of individual countries to global citizens. this means we need to understand each other in different ways to be more openminded and culturally competent in ways we didnt need 20 years ago back when we shared one culture and one thought pattern with our coworkers.
 for example on a project around electric vehicles were focusing on how to implement selfdrivingautonomous vehicles in cities safely. that is a big effort for the engineers  including how to design the new city from a safety perspective.
 how does this work factor into climate change andor the circular economy?
 as a part of social sustainability we have to understand global mobility and how to utilise the strengths in our differences rather than trying to make everyone the same. we need to be more intentional in how we work taking care of each other and the environment. sustainable business involves viewing the economic aspects of everything we do from a sustainability perspective. sustainability and profit are in balance not opposition.
 businesses are understanding this but educational programmes have lagged behind. education hasnt truly changed for 20 years. of course we need people with competencies in things like economics computer science it etc. but the education itself must be more international and with a sustainability lens. the master in sustainable development can show you how to take your computer science skills for example and lead with them. you will have advanced skills in seeing the possibilities instead of being trained simply as a cog in a machine.
 as an example of this need for forwardthinking leadership take elon musk ceo of tesla. musk had originally approved bitcoin as a form of payment for tesla. he did not consider the terrible implications of bitcoin for the environment. only now has he revoked bitcoin as an approved form of payment.
 those who have worked with developing digital infrastructures like blockchain have not thought about sustainability. of course it is possible to have bitcoins that are produced in green ways but previously no one asked about or understood it. this is an example of the need to look ahead and see possibilities. this ultimately helps build a world where there are no oppositions between longterm economic profitability and environmental sustainability.
 will students have a chance to connect with companies?
 absolutely. this isnt a programme where you only sit on campus and read about things. you read and then go out into the world to be a part of the solutions. you will have the chance to build your own relationships with important people and businesses that will be helpful to your future working life. this will make it easier for you to get an interesting and important job anywhere in the world.
 is there anything you want students interested in sustainable development to know?
 from classroom education to workintegrated learning in the forest  students and teachers as knowledge cocreators in hybrid learning spaces
 standardization and professional knowledge in integration work
 thomas winman ingemar johansson
 learning integrationwork through transnational digitalized courses
 dimensions and perspectives of quality in integration work
 marie vesterlind thomas winman
 artifacts at work  internship learning and technology
 knowing in practice  the use of dialogue as a pedagogical method in integration work
 electronic patient records in interprofessional decision making  standardized categories and local use
 thomas winman hans rystedt
 electronic patient records in action  transforming information into professionally relevant knowledge
 learning to fly  social pedagogy in a contemporary society
 hanserik hermansson thomas winman
 orchestrating of learning in higher education through internships
 ingemar johansson thomas winman
 the cultural brokering power of social pedagogy in education for roma students
 the development of mobilizing pedagogical strategies
 knowing practice
 being a rector  a study of knowledge needs and knowledge development in secondary schools
 local knowing and the use of electronic patientrecords  categories and continuity of health care
 thomas winman roger säljö hans rystedt
 social pedagogy in swedish folk high schools
 thomas winman keith palmroth
 social pedagogy in swedish primary schools  a resource a subjectand a perspective for working with issues of socialization and marginalization?
 social inclusion and institutional integration
 thomas winman hanserik hermansson
 three dimensions of wil
 wil as a philosophy
 at university west we see both theoretical and practical knowledge as equally important and mutually dependent on each other. we believe that advanced knowledge is created in many parts of society not least when people practice their professions every day.
 when the practical knowledge is integrated with theoretical new knowledge and new learning is created. as an institution of higher learning we are constantly looking for new ways to integrate these two forms of knowledge.
 wil as a pedagogical method
 to be able to integrate practical and theoretical knowledge into our educations working life is a natural part of our courses and programs. we want our students to gain a deeper understanding of their respective subjects and create their own insights and practical experience.
 but at university west students get something more than an education. through wil students learn to estimate and reflect on their own learning. when students leave us they are therefore well prepared for lifelong learning and lifelong development. these are important skills to bring to a working life and a world in constant change.
 since 2020 wil has been available as an interdisciplinary thirdcycle subject area. it involves studies of the learning that takes place through the integration of theoretical and practical knowledge and experiences. these are taken from learning situations within academic studies as well as working life and civil society.
 ticase  titanium castings for engine structures
 gkn aerospace swerea swecast and university west in sweden will work together with the german titanium casting supplier arconic bestwig with the target of improving the design of engine structures for improved castability
 arconic bestwig is already engaged in a lufo project 2016  dec 2019 where they improve their capability in precision casting process for aerospace parts in titanium with new shell technology new hip supplier and improved simulation of the process in order to increase their capability with regard to component size and geometric complexity. arconic have asked if gkn could share relevant jet engine geometries and support arconic with design for castability activities. gkn has a strong interest in developing a european supplier of more complex structural titanium castings. today the market for castings for engine structures is dominated by us suppliers.
 the purpose of the proposed project is to
 develop designforcasting methodology
 make use of unique casting facility in germany
 extend the casting simulation capabilities for at swerea swecast to titanium alloys
 further strengthen the titanium materials competence at university west arena ptc.
 strengthen the joint position of gkn aerospace and arconic as a natural partnerssuppliers of complex titanium compressor structures that will lead to business with the engine oems globally
 the project will answer the following important questions
 how to tailor a titanium structure design to optimize castability minimize casting defects reduce weight and improve surface finish.
 investigate the relationship between casting parameters mechanical properties microstructure and defects
 20210305 ipad som digital whiteboard
 inspirationswebbinare 2020
 i got the chance to have a conversation with someone from university west and explain what i did for mathematics and computer science. that my previous courses contained it he says. they then reviewed my application and accepted me.
 till finds the most fun part of studying to be the group projects and labs where he can work together with other students  exchanging opinions and ideas helping and being helped by others in the group. through these collaborations they have worked on some interesting projects such as a camera project where they had to place different objects on a white table and make the camera recognize credit cards or aaa batteries mark them with a box apply text and display the size of the object. it was a challenge but they managed to make it work in the end. for till the process of working together in a group and seeing the results at the end is the most enjoyable part of his studies so far.
 one of the things that stands out for till is the level of engagement between students and professors. students are more on the same level with the professors he says. youre allowed to say their first name to anyone. its more an equal level and thats what i really like. he also appreciates the universitys wellstructured systems such as the course pm that consolidates all relevant information the canvas platform for course materials and the exam web page that publishes all exams online.
 till also appreciates the modern amenities offered by his university. he loves the fact that there are plenty of study rooms available for group work or for those who prefer a quiet space to study. he finds that its easy for him to come to university every day and enjoy his time there.
 another aspect of university life that till appreciates is the flexibility of his schedule. with some days having no lectures or labs he has the freedom to plan his work on his own which allows him time to visit his loved ones back home in germany. these visits and being visited in return are an important part of tills life outside of university life and he values the ability to maintain these relationships while still being a dedicated student.
 when till is not studying or attending classes at the university he likes to spend time with his friends.
 one of tills friends from his program has his wife in sweden and she loves to cook traditional iranian dishes. and we all love to eat it till says. so we often meet to experience her meals and its always nice. sometimes i bring a cake.
 till also enjoys playing paddle and tennis with his fellow students going to the pub or to fika. he also goes to the gym and spends time exploring the city with friends.
 one of the things that till enjoys most about living in the city of trollhättan is the fritidsbanken a sports equipment lending service thats free for everyone. its so great. i have a friend coming over from germany and i can get him anything he needs like football shoes or a bike he says.
 swedish way of life
 till has noticed some cultural differences between sweden and germany particularly in the pace of life. the german people are always stressed and really focus on work he says. here its more relaxed. we take breaks during lectures and still get everything done. till plans to start working after graduation but he also wants to maintain some of the swedish mentality in his work schedule. he believes that a parttime job possibly working 30 hours a week could be one way of finding more time for life outside work. i dont want to get lost deep in this work schedule all the time.
 its105 15 hp
 off100 7.5 hp
 the course provides an introduction and overview on applied fatigue and fracture mechanics.
 after a basic introduction to fatigue both stressbased sn curve and strainbased en curve fatigue analyses are covered with a discussion on when these analyses are applicable. the course introduces the fundamental concepts of fracture mechanics and explains how these can be utilized to design against fatigue ensuring a greater level of structural sustainability. test methods to obtain fatigue related material properties are discussed with emphasis on why these tests should be carried out with utmost care.
 if you have entered your personal data above then university west will process the personal data for the purpose of administering your case. more information on how university west processes personal data can be found on the webpage processing of personal data at university west.
 time and place program introduction day
 time and place program introduction
 international programme in politics and economics  ippe 3 years program code sgipeh24room c120date monday 2 septembertime 1015
 master in leadership in digitalised organisations 2 yearsprogram code salidh24room f131date monday 2 septembertime 1315
 master in sustainable development 2 yearsprogram code sawish24room f131date monday 2 septembertime 1315
 master in work integrated political studies 2 yearsprogram code sawiph24room f131date monday 2 septembertime 1315
 master in finance 1 yearprogram code safiah24room e203date monday 2 septembertime 0915
 master in international business 1 yearprogram code saifoh24room i106date monday 2 septembertime 1315
 master in it and management 1 yearprogram code saiveh24room f315date monday 2 septembertime 1015
 master in cybersecurity 1 yearprogram code tacybh24room c205date monday 2 septembertime 1015
 master in software engineering 1 yearprogram code tasoeh24room f409date monday 2 septembertime 0915
 master in operations and supply chain management 2 yearsprogram code tascmh24room f211date monday 2 septembertime 1315
 master in ai and automation 2 yearsprogram code tamaih24room i105date monday 2 septembertime 0915
 master in ai and automation 1 yearprogram code tamauh24room i105date monday 2 septembertime 0915
 master in electromechanical vehicle engineering 1 yearprogram code taelvh24 campusroom g122date monday 2 septembertime 1315
 master in welding technology 2 yearsprogram code tamsth24room j105date monday 2 septembertime 0800
 master in manufacturing engineering 1 yearprogram code taptkh24room f210date monday 2 septembertime 0800
 master in manufacturing engineering 2 years program code tatikh24room f210date monday 2 septembertime 0800
 master in robotics and automation 1 year campusprogram code taroah24 campusroom j105date monday 2 septembertime 1015
 master in robotics and automation distanceprogram code taroah24 distance fulltime and halftime studiesroom zoomdate monday 2 septembertime 1515
 master in robotics and automation 2 yearsprogram code tarauh24room j105date monday 2 septembertime 1015
 to consider when reporting a problem
 before reporting a problem with our computers or systems there are some things to consider.
 if there is a problem with a computer try at first rebooting it. there are a number of simple problems that can be solved this way. if the problem persists please report it to servicecenter. please attach the it number of the computer to your report. youll find it on a white label on the univerity west computers.
 for problems with university wests systems you can first check if we published any  messages about interruptions in our delivered services on the webpages. please keep in mind that we have service windows every wednesday at 430 pm until 11 pm.
 for questions about how to use software and systems perhaps one of our guides can help you solve the problem.
 please turn to service center with your report
 what happens when i have reported a case?
 most of the received cases will be registered in our servicecenter system. you will get an email confirmation with a case number. you can reply to this mail if you need to complet your report with some additional information. you will also get an email when the case is closed.
 to seek self the childs place in the migration literature
 in this study we will focus on the voices granted to migrant children in contemporary fiction. our hypothesis is that childhood migration challenges assumptions made about identity home and the child.
 the migrant status complicates the understanding of migrant children as children in that western constructions of childhood may work to exclude young people who transgress the perceived norms. narratives of childhood migration also invite questions about the relation between subjectivity and place as ideas surrounding the construction of the self are often intimately linked to notions of home and belonging. by investigating fictional accounts of how migrant children locate their own selves we can see that other ways of understanding agency are made possible.
 the impact of word of mouth when booking a hotel  could a good friends opinion outweigh the online majority?
 indicators of economic development  an exploratory study using swedish municipal data contrasting economic development and growth
 how well can completion of online courses be predicted using binary logistic regression?
 ulf andersson tobias arvemo martin gellerstedt
 employment and economic activity in different swedish border regions
 productivity and cross border accessibility to human capital  a study comparing norwegian and swedish border regions
 do different measures of economic growth lead to different conclusions?
 different measures of economic growth lead to different conclusions?
 working together  primary care doctors and nurses attitudes to collaboration
 tentative indices for regional economic development  an exploratory study using swedish municipal data
 productivity and crossborder accessibility to human capital  a study comparing norwegian and swedish border regions
 can measurements of online behavior predict course performance?
 workintegrated learning with workintegrated learners
 university colleges effect on economic growth in swedish middlesized municipalities
 university colleges effect on municipal growth in swedish middlesized municipalities
 bitr. itchef
 tobias pehrsson
 förutom forskning inom entreprenörskap har tobias publicerat ett flertal vetenskapliga artiklar relaterat till i huvudsak internationellt företagande strategi marknadsföring och corporate social responsibility. dessa artiklar återfinns i journaler såsom european business review journal of international entrepreneurship international journal of innovation science international journal of business competition and growth international journal of business and globalisation and corporate governance the international journal of business in society.
 get to know tobias ekenstam who is deputy it manager at university west and works with how the stars eu alliance can build a joint campus  digitally and physically.
 hi tobias what is your role within stars eu?
 i work with work package 5 which is about how we build a joint campus  both physically and digitally. it is not about building new lecture halls or meeting rooms but rather about sharing the resources we have and making it visible to everyone that we are part of a european university. my primary focus is on the digital campus.
 what does it mean to create a digital campus? what is the purpose?
 there is also talk of a digital campus that will be characterized by cocreation. what does that mean?
 we want to create a creative and inspiring environment that promotes interaction between academia working life and society. its a huge task but were taking baby steps forward.
 director international affairs
 tomas beno teaches automation and manufacturing in the engineering programmes at the university.
 coolant boiling and cavitation wear  a new tool wear mechanism on wc tools in machining alloy 718 with highpressure coolant
 effects of high pressure cooling in the flank and rake faces of wc tool on the tool wear mechanism and process conditions in turning of alloy 718
 evaluation of surface integrity after high energy machining with edm laser beam machining and abrasive water jet machining of alloy 718
 flank wear characteristics of wcco tools when turning alloy 718 with highpressure coolant supply
 philipp hoier uta klement nageswaran tamil alagan tomas beno anders wretland
 characterization of tool wear when machining alloy 718 with highpressure cooling using conventional and surfacemodified wcco tools
 characterization of tool wear when machining alloy 718 with high pressure cooling using conventional and surfacemodified wcco tools
 eds analysis of flank wear and surface integrity in machining of alloy 718 with forced coolant application
 next generation insert for forced coolant application in machining of inconel 718
 nageswaran tamil alagan tomas beno anders wretland
 fe modelling and characterization of chip curl in nose turning process
 ashwin devotta tomas beno ronnie löf
 modeling of chip curl in orthogonal turning using spiral galaxy describing function
 ashwin moris devotta tomas beno ronnie löf
 cutting temperatures during hard turning  measurements and effects on white layer formation in aisi 52100
 measurement of cutting edge temperature in drilling
 tomas beno u hulling
 measurement method for the identification of individual teeth in milling operations
 green machining  improving the bottom line
 cnc machining process planning productivity  a qualitative survey
 machining aerospace materials with roomtemperature and cooled minimalquantity cutting fluids
 machining aerospace material with subcooled minimal quantity cppling lubrication fluids
 new aspects on condition monitoring of machine tools and machining processes
 investigation of minimal quantity cooling lubrication in turning of inconel 718
 highpressure flank cooling and chip morphology in turning alloy 718
 a detailed investigation of residual stresses after milling inconel 718 using typical production parameters for assessment of affected depth
 investigation of microtextured cutting tools used for face turning of alloy 718 with highpressure cooling
 influence of surface features for increased heat dissipation on tool wear
 nageswaran tamil alagan tomas beno philipp hoier uta klement anders wretland
 finite element modelling and characterisation of chip curl in nose turning process
 improved cutting force measurements in milling using inverse filtering
 detectability of various machining conditions by using internal encoder signals
 jari repo anders wretland tomas beno jueifeng tu
 inprocess tool wear detection using internal encoder signals for unmanned robust machining
 investigation of modified cutting insert with forced coolant application in machining of alloy 718
 integrated optimization model for cutting data selection based on maximal mrr and tool utilization in continuous machining operations
 ana esther bonilla hernández tomas beno jari repo anders wretland
 characterization of chip morphology in oblique nose turning employing high speed videography and computed tomography technique
 ashwin moris devotta tomas beno
 analysis of tool utilization from material removal rate perspective
 computed tomography as a tool for examining surface integrity in drilled holes in cfrp composites
 a methodology for temperature correction when using twocolor pyrometers  compensation for surface topography and material
 machine tool internal encoders as sensors for the detection of tool wear
 energy and cost efficiency in cnc machining from a process planning perspective
 impact of energy efficiency on computernumerically controlled machining
 machine tool and process condition monitoring using poincaré maps
 a survey of metal working companies readiness for process planning performance measurements
 investigation of minimal quantity lubrication in turning of waspalloy
 onging and finished projects
 gericke n.  torbjörnsson t. 2022. supporting local school reform toward education for sustainable development the need for creating and continuously negotiating a shared vision and building trust. the journal of environmental education 534 231249. doi10.108000958964.2022.2102565
 torbjörnsson t.. lundhplm c.  harring n. 2018. environmental sustainability and legal education swedish law students value orientation. retfaerd 4134 99115.
 harring n. torbjörnsson t.  lundholm c. 2018. solving environmental problems together? the roles of value orientations and trust in the state in environmental policy support among swedish undergraduate students. education sciences vol 8 iss 3 p 124 20183 124. doi10.3390educsci8030124
 harring n. lundholm c. torbjörnsson t. 2017. the effects of higher education in economics law and political science on perceptions of responsibility and sustainability world sustainability series  retrieved from
 toward the end of the studies
 the licentiate degree
 to earn a licentiate degree one must have written a licentiate thesis that received a passing grade. this must be defended orally at a licentiate seminar that is open to the public.
 order isbn and serial number
 a manuscript of the licentiate thesis as finalised as possible should be sent to the referee and the examiner at least 25 working days before the scheduled licentiate seminar. if either of them discovers anything questionable in the thesis they should provide feedback as quickly as possible.
 for information about printing contact the communication department.
 the coordinator for thirdcycle studies should be contacted at least 15 working days before the licentiate seminar so that information about the seminar can be published in good time on the university website. an electronic version of the thesis should be uploaded to the digital archives for scholarly works diva. printed copies should be sent to the referee the examiner and the library. no more changes can be made after printing.
 licentiate seminarthe licentiate thesis is presented and reviewed at a public seminar. the appointed external referee has the task of providing a critical review of the thesis at the seminar. the examiners task is to chair the proceedings and set a grade for the thesis. after the seminar the grade is announced documented and made public.
 the doctoral degree
 to earn a doctoral degree a student must have written a doctoral thesis that received a pass and have received passing grades in the courses that were part of his or her studies.
 the dissertation can contain material from an earlier licentiate thesis. that work is part of the dissertation work and should be defended at the public defence.
 if the dissertation is written in a language other than swedish a swedish abstract  ould be provided. if the licentiate thesis is written in a language other than english an english abstract should be provided.
 the request is then sent to är in good time so that the board can take a decision at least two weeks prior to the scheduled date. är appoints a chairman an external reviewer and an examining committee.
 the manuscript of the thesis as finalised as possible is sent to the external reviewer and all members of the examining committee at least 35 working days prior to the scheduled public defence. if anything questionable about the thesis is discovered feedback should be sent as quickly as possible.
 notification of the date of defence the upcoming defence is announced when the author nails a copy of the dissertation to a post in library of the university. this is done at least 15 days prior to the scheduled defence. with the nailing of the manuscript the dissertation is made available to the public and no more changes may be made. an electronic version of the dissertation should be uploaded to diva at this time  the socalled electronic nailing. information about the defence should is published at the universitys website.
 the public defence the defence itself is structured as follows presentation review summary questions from the examining committee and finally questions from the audience. at the end of the session the examining committee meets to evaluate the dissertation and awards it the grade of pass or fail.
 the degree certificate
 at the end of your studies you should apply to receive a degree certificate. to receive this certificate you must fulfil the criteria set out by the system of qualifications the general syllabus and your individual study plan. read more about degree certificate here.
 if the university refuses your request you can appeal that decision to the higher education appeals board.
 the doctoral awards ceremony
 when you have received your doctoral degree you will be invited to participate in an awards ceremony the next time there is an academic ceremony. at this ceremony you will receive a diploma and a crown of laurels if you have not purchased a doctoral cap. the awards ceremony has no legal significance it is a formality only.
 international womens day march 8 draws attention to inequality and the situation of women around the world. since genderequal academic environments are one of the pieces of the puzzle for creating sustainable societies it has been natural for university west to link the gender equality issue to our overall work with agenda 2030.
 gender equality  a measure of quality
 since 2017 all higher education institutions in sweden have been commissioned to work with gender mainstreaming  which is swedens main strategy for achieving the gender equality policy goals for a genderequal society. the very idea  and goal  of this work is that gender equality should be a natural part of our processes where the pursuit of equal conditions between women and men is part of all decisionmaking.
 why are there now more women at production technology west?
 how do you make the doctoral students want to develop internally and take academic steps?
 we want more women to make an academic career. it is very much a management issue to encourage provide conditions and to make visible the career paths that exist. creating a completely equal environment within the academy is a longterm task. as there are more women they do not have to embrace the existing culture but they are involved in creating other new values.
 it is important that we show benefits and opportunities when we recruit. showing female role models is important showing that it is possible to combine an academic career with family life. it can be difficult to combine if it is not equal in the home. but you should not be required to work 60 hours a week. the culture must change within the academy.
 read more about agenda 2030 and the global goals here in swedish
 trainee dalsland
 the ongoing transition to more renewable energy production the expansion of the transmission and distribution system and changes in the consumption means that the design and operation of the power system must be reviewed to maintain a robust and stable power system. transient stability is one of the stability phenomena that are dimensioning for the swedish power system. the project aims to increase knowledge about how the changes of the components in the grid extended networks and varying power flows will affect the transient stability in the power system and how the new production sources can contribute to transient stability.
 increased knowledge gives the possibility to utilize various production sources and other equipment more efficiently enables more renewables and enables the power system to operate closer to its limits. in this way the power transmission can be increased which also leads to a more efficient utilization of the power system and lower socioeconomic costs.
 photo by the canal in the city of trollhattan
 airports
 right outside the airport you can find buses with the logo vy flygbussarna that takes you from landvetter airport to nils ericson terminalen göteborg c. you can check the timetable for your arrival day and find ticket information here.
 train from gothenburg central station to trollhättan station. ticket information and timetable can be found here.
 from the train station in trollhättan it is a 10 minutes walk to university west.
 there is also a solution to rent a car.
 photo most of the hotels are situated in the middle of trollhattan near the canal.
 scandic swania hotel  prebooked with a discountstorgatan 4749 461 26 trollhättanparticipants in the desrist 2024 in trollhättan are welcome to book their stay at scandic swania. rooms have been prebooked and with our booking codes you will get a discount on your stay.   bookingthe rooms can be booked via scandics website  or by calling scandics central bokning on 46851751700 dial tone 1.  enter booking code bhog030624 conditionsthe bookings are made individually and will be handled as an individual bookings. the guest can change andor cancel their room until 6 pm on the day of arrival. in case of changes andor cancellations after 6 pm on the day of arrival or in case of noshow the hotel has the right to charge for missed nights. in case of early departure the guest must notify the hotel 24 hours before departure in order not to be liable for payment.  checkin time is 3 pm and checkout time 12 pm. for arrivals before 3 pm we offer the possibility of checkin subject to availability. otherwise you have the possibility to store your luggage at the hotel.  book a groupobserve that code above only applies to individual bookings booked via their website or the central booking above. if you want to book a group these requests will be handled separately with different prices and conditions.
 other hotel alternatives
 clarion collection hotel kung oscardrottninggatan 17 461 32 trollhättan
 wil24  conference
 the wil24 conference is jointly organised by central university of technology free state cut and university west. the conference is held at kapama private game reserve in south africa which besides fivestar accommodation and airy design has newly constructed excellent firstclass conference facilities and restaurants. wil24 welcome you to a unique conference set in the peacefulness of the african bush with lively facetoface discussions presentations networking and experiences beyond your dreams under the african sky.
 travel by air international flights from all around the world take you to johannesburg oliver tambo international airport or cape town international airport.   direct connected domestic flights take you to hoedspruit eastgate airport which is located a stones throw away kapama private game reserve.   domestic airlines such as airlink and cemair operates daily flights from the international airports in johannesburg and cape town. for flight schedules and bookings please ask your travel agency or book directly through the airlines respective website.   note it is especially important to book the domestic flight as early as possible to secure your travel dates.   example of domestic flight schedules depart from cape town on wednesday 3rd april  return from hoedspruit on friday 5th april  online booking with airlink southern africas most reliable fullservice airline  flyairlink
 from cape town  wednesday 1040 to hoedspruit 1310. direct flight 2h 30min
 from hoedspruit  friday 1355 to cape town 1640. direct flight 2h 45min
 online booking with cemair cemair  scheduled flights in south africa flycemair.co.za
 from cape town  wednesday 0930 to hoedspruit 1200. direct flight 2h 30min
 from hoedspruit  friday 1230 to cape town 1515. direct flight 2h 45min
 depart from johannesburg on wednesday 3rd april  return from hoedspruit on friday 5th april  airlink southern africas most reliable fullservice airline  flyairlink
 from johannesburg  wednesday 1030 to hoedspruit 1125. direct flight 55min
 from johannesburg  wednesday 1250 to hoedspruit 1355. direct flight 55min
 from hoedspruit  friday 1205 to johannesburg 1310. direct flight 1h 05min
 from hoedspruit  friday 1420 to johannesburg 1525. direct flight 1h 05min
 cemair cemair  scheduled flights in south africa flycemair.co.za
 from johannesburg  wednesday 1140 to hoedspruit 1235. direct flight 55min
 from hoedspruit  friday 1305 to johannesburg 1400. direct flight 55min
 travel by road if you travel by road to kapama private game reserve take either the n12 or the n4 from johannesburg to emalahleni and middelburg. turn onto the r540 towards emakhazeni emnotweni dullstroom and mashishing. from mashishing proceed on the r36 to ohrigstad and through the strijdom tunnel to hoedspruit. from hoedspruit take the r40 to klaserie and continue until you reach the kapama private game reserve entrance on the left.   please note the small gate on guernsey road and the gate on argyle road are service entry gates and are not to be used. access will only be through the kapama game reserve main gate on the r40.  weather  clothes april is late summer month at kapama. one could expect rain showers which often last for only an hour or so. although it is not generally cold in april it may be chilly in the early morning and evening so it is advisable to bring a light warm jacket and comfortable shoes. also bring short sleeve shirts short pants and bathing gear as day temperatures can be very warm. it is advisable to bring sunscreen with a high protection factor hat sunglasses lip balm and insect repellent.  for safari drives try to keep the colours of your clothing as neutral as possible. khaki colours browns and greens are generally the best. darker andor bright colours tend to attract unwanted insects. kapama provide rainproof ponchos during game drives and umbrellas are available to use at the lodge.  there is no formal dress code during the conference. however you are expected to dress semiformal for dinner.   vaccination because kapama is situated in a lowrisk malaria area taking malaria prophylaxis medication is normally not necessary. check with your local medical centre about any medication to take as a safety precaution. visitors are generally advised to get vaccinated against hepatitis a.   electricity and internet electricity is a 220volt alternating current system. wallplug units take a round twoprong european plug. it is advisable to bring a converter or adapter to charge laptops and phones. kapama has free wifi connectivity. cellphones work as normal at the facility.   laundry kapama river lodge have 24hour laundry service. all our rooms are supplied with basic amenities such as soap shampoo conditioner and body lotion.   visa scandinavian citizens travelling to south africa as a touristvisitor do generally not need a visa. scandinavian passport holders get a 90day tourist visa when arriving in the country. for other nationalities please check the touristvisitor visa requirements for your country of residencecitizenship.   time zone south africa standard time is similar as europe and the same time as sweden during swedish summertime and1h difference during swedish wintertime.     currency and credit card during the conference at kapama all meals drinks coffee as well as the transfer to and from the local airport are included in the conference fee so additional costs will normally not be necessary. all major credit cards are accepted in most places in south africa. the south african currency rand zar can be traded or exchanged at all major banks and exchanged bureaus inside or outside of south africa.
 the venue  university west
 university west is located in the town centre of trollhättan close to the car park train and bus.
 is open until september 6th 2023 register here
 student 1000 sek inc vat etsa member 2000 sek inc vatnonetsa member 3000 sek inc vatnonetsa member along with etsa yearly membership 2300 sek inc vat
 the fee includes
 one day on various topics related to suspension and solution thermal spraying and sps demonstration
 all meals part of the program
 the airport has daily flights to and from most major european cities. there is a convenient airport bus service that connects landvetter to the central station in gothenburg. buses run 24 times an hour. you can book carpooling taxi from the airport directly to accommodation in trollhättan with the company trollhättans hyrverk.
 the airport has frequent services to bromma airport stockholm
 a special discounted rate has been negotiated at the scandic swania hotel over the school dates. rooms are available on a first come first served basis until rooms sells out.
 bookings should be made through the hotel website
 the discounted room rate is 999 sek per night with the code bhog110923.
 citizens from the majority of countries outside the eu require a visa to visit sweden. this is a decision reached by sweden together with the other eu countries. read more about visa to sweden here.
 read more on how to get to and from trollhättan when in sweden
 international flights
 no not really just select a flight to europe and connect via any european city to either gothenburg or stockholm. there are a number of flights to both stockholm and gothenburg from e.g. copenhagen frankfurt london andor paris. if you choose to travel to stockholm it is possible to transfer to a domestic flight directly to trollhättan with a price of 40200 euros depending on availability. on the other hand do a large number of flights connect to gothenburg airport from the major international airports in europe. gothenburg is being relatively close to trollhättan and therefore might be a quicker alternative.
 british airways
 local direction  parking
 information about our campus location and parking can be found here.
 gpscoordinates for the carpark is58 16 54.84 12 17 39.4858.281912.2943
 venue and hotel information
 trollhättan offers a wide range of accomodation to suit a variety of needs.
 there are two airports close to trollhättan
 you will most probably arrive at landvetter airport south of gothenburg about an hours drive from trollhättan where the nyris 13 conference will be held.
 you may also arrive to arlanda airport or bromma airport in stockholm and from there fly to trollhättanvänersborgs airport.
 transfer service
 for your convenience we recommend you to book your transfer online using the following link trollhättans car service.
 shuttle bus
 for those of you who prefere to travel by bus from the airport there is a convenient shuttle bus service.
 for travel arrangements by train please visit sj.
 ail som filosofi
 what does it mean to be trans?at the most basic level being transgender means the sex you were assigned at birth differs from how you identify. this is different from cisgender people who have a gender identity that is consistent with their sex assigned at birth.
 for most trans people i use the  to signify inclusivity of the gender spectrum the disparity between sex assigned at birth and gender identity relates to how one feels in on the inside dysphoria around primary and secondary sex characteristics and social perceptions of their gender. it is fundamentally a biologicalmedical issue and i think one of the ways the range of the human experience can be beautiful.
 it is important to differentiate gender identity sexuality and gender expression as these are not the same. i like this concept of the genderbread person  trans people can have a range of sexualities just like cis people and differs from gender expression for instance just because someone enjoys crossdressing doesnt mean they are transgender.
 i also want to point out that sex is also a spectrum  intersex people represent 12 of the population. most intersex people are not transgender but i bring this up to demonstrate that there are more options than the femalemale binary that society forces us into. many cultures throughout human history have recognized and celebrated a third gender māhū hijra etc.. so this idea that gender and sex is a spectrum isnt a new concept its something thats always been here.
 what challenges do trans people face?trans people face many challenges including discrimination harassment violence abuse and ostracization from family and friends. these issues which largely stem from lack of understanding can lead to limited medical support financial struggles and poor mental health.
 there is a reason that over 40 of trans people have attempted suicide  its not intrinsic to being trans rather it reflects the challenges associated with receiving both medical and social support. access to gender affirming care and good social support has been shown to drastically improve mental health outcomes for trans people. this goes back my point previously  being trans should be solely a medical issue not a political one.
 what challenges do trans people face that are specific to sweden? how does that differ from your experiences in the us?the challenges that trans people face certainly have some commonalities regardless of location. to me the biggest challenge facing trans people in sweden is access to trans healthcare and ease of changing legal documentation.
 i am american and started my transition prior to moving to sweden. thus ive had an easier time with the swedish system for trans healthcare but i have the perspective of living in multiple countries as a trans person including the us canada and australia. in my opinion the swedish approach to trans healthcare is antiquated and harmful.
 in sweden it is required to get diagnosed as transgender prior to receiving medical treatment or changing ones gender marker. this is region dependent but waitlists to even begin this process are typically more than 2 years vårdgaranti does not apply here.
 once your time comes you go through the investigation process at a gender clinic consisting of a psychologist assessment of your gender identity and overall mental health  this can take another 2 years. assuming the medical team decides youre trans which ive heard largely excludes nonbinary people then youre finally referred to the waitlists for medical transition hormones surgeries etc..
 this idea of having to prove youre trans to a mental health professional over a multiyear process of invasive questioning is completely insane to me. i do think there is value in seeking therapy to explore ones thoughts about their gender identity and life changes during transition but that should be separate.
 there is a lot i love about sweden but this patronizing approach to trans healthcare is not one of them. i believe a lot of this is driven by cisgender people questioning why anyone would want to transition and the myth that many trans people detransition.
 however fewer than 1 of people regret medical transition yet over 7 of people regret having children in the us and germany and a 14 regret rate amongst all types of surgery. what other medical intervention has such a high satisfaction rate? but again this comes down to a cultural issue and general misunderstanding of trans people.
 do you think swedes in general know how complicated the process is or how discriminatory health care can be? my impression has been that most swedes think that trans healthcare is easy and quick to access and that sweden has a progressive approach to trans issues but in my opinion that is far from the truth.
 until 2013 trans people in sweden were forced to be sterilized to pursue gender affirming surgeries or change their gender marker. even now one cannot change their gender marker without the diagnosis that takes many years to get there is legislation in the works to change this.
 while some of this will arguably change and reflects slow policy updates some things are actively going backwards. for instance despite the substantial evidence demonstrating major positive effects for trans youth undergoing some form of medical transition trans healthcare is pretty much unavailable for those under 18 february 2022 socialstyrelsen update reducing access to care for trans youth in swedish and english. yikes.
 on the flip side i have found sweden otherwise great as a trans person in terms of safety and societal acceptance relative to the us at least. but there is still a lot that can be improved.
 how do you think your personal experience as transgender person might be different to other members in the community race social status social class?i am white highly educated have a good job a great support network and as a trans man i benefit from male privilege to some degree. i have an easier time in society and generally have the advantage of stability and safety for those reasons. my experiences likely vastly differ from for instance trans women people of color people who have unsupportive families asylum seekers or those without employment even in sweden.
 what would you like to share with the world? what is the most important thing society should know about transgender people?we are just normal people trying to exist in the world same as everyone else. i would encourage cisgender people to learn more about trans experiences and struggles and areas where cis people have privileges that trans people frequently do not.
 unfortunately the loudest people in the room are also the ones that are afraid of us. we need your help changing the narrative.
 university west is located near the west coast of southern sweden in trollhättan a 35minute train ride from swedens second largest city gothenburg.
 trollhättan with its 60000 inhabitants is intersected by the göta river and its spectacular waterfalls. not far from trollhättan you will find lake vänern the largest lake in sweden. you dont have to waste time in traffic queues or feel stressed in overcrowded subways. as a student in trollhättan you have all you need close by. a few minutes walk from campus youll find yourself in beautiful natural landscapes.
 trollhättan is home to a number of hightech companies like gkn aerospace producing jet engines and developing rocket engine technology and the chinese nevs national electric vehicle sweden  developing its platform for the future generation of electric cars in the former saab automobile factory.
 more than 2000 students at university west commute daily to trollhättan from different locations in the immediate area. a 5minute walk to the train and bus station gives you access to frequent rail links both northwards towards vänersborgmellerudkarlstad and the south with the entire göta älvdalen and gothenburg.
 the project has a particular focus on the digital city centre.
 background and current situation in trollhättanthe city center of trollhättan like many other city centers faces challenges with retail in the center affecting the citys attractiveness and possibly leading to fewer investments and talents being drawn to the city. at the same time external trading clusters contribute further to fewer people moving around the city which reduces the possibilities for a safe and lively city around the clock. for these reasons it is essential that the private sector which has cuttingedge expertise in innovative logistics digital business models hybrid formats for commerce and services and a strong entrepreneurial spirit is included in the work with a lively neighborhood city. the ongoing digitalization affects for example peoples ways of working where they work how they make their purchases what they buy and how they recycle. digitalization also changes peoples views on what retail is and it is necessary for the city to plan for a new way to organize the city center based on the citizens consumption needs and new purchasing behaviors. a wellthoughtout digital city center can contribute with unexpected solutions for meetings increased accessibility and comfort and also provide new physical places for a consumer generation where both offline and online services contribute to a vibrant city center.
 fundingthe project is funded by riksbankens jubileumsfond and the flexit program whose calls are intended to enable coproduction with companies and organizations outside of higher education institutions. the projects overarching ambition is to augment comprehension and insight into how municipalbusiness collaborations can vitalize the city core rendering it inclusive and pioneering in digital innovation.
 this project concentrates specifically on the digital city center fostering a nexus of innovation in concert with commercial stakeholders.
 welcome to the thermal spray of suspensions  solutions symposium  ebcs 2023
 university west is proud to host the thermal spray of suspensions  solutions symposium  ebcs ts4e in september 1213 2023. this is a flagship event of asm internationals thermal spray society and it is the first time ever that the event is being conducted outside north america and this aptly reflects the stature of university west among the global thermal spray community.
 you can expect to learn and see
 innovative solutions to improve coating performance in various industries
 potential of suspension and solution ts technologies to replace other coating processes.
 latest developments and trends in ebcs and cmcs for next generation gas turbines.
 top notch speakers from world recognized institutions industry academia and government.
 enhanced learning  networking
 suspensionderived thermal barrier coatings
 plasma torches for liquid feedstock spraying
 versatility in liquid feedstock thermal spraying
 ebc i challenges and progress
 ebc ii feedstock processing and performance
 exploiting the potential of suspension thermal spray technologies
 coatings for aerospace applications
 the day before the ts4e conference the 2nd summer school on suspension  solution thermal spraying will be organised by university west in trollhättan. this will be the next in the series of such thematic summerwinter schools conducted under the banner of the european thermal spray association etsa. this event follows the success of the previous summer school on suspension  solution thermal spraying held in trollhättan in 2016 bringing together people from both academia and industry.
 the school will have very affordable registration fees starting at 1 000 sek for students including one day on various topics related to suspension and solution thermal spraying and sps demonstration all meals part of the program course material and course certificate. read more about the summer school and register
 the ts4e 2023 is being organized in the city of trollhättan which is beautifully situated along the göta river. trollhättan has a rich history of industry and innovation and is today home to many large medium and small manufacturing companies.
 information about the program registration and more
 exchange semester at technical university of dortmund germany
 how did you find this internship placement? it was notified by the departmental coordinator to everyone in the class asking interested students to take a chance to go for abroad studies in germany. i was very interested from the beginning and then i approached mohit gupta who was our departmental coordinator. he gave a well round information about the exchange studies about the life style and education system in germany. he spoke very highly about the erasmus exchange program which made me more curious and inquisitive to take this opportunity to go for abroad studies.  how would you describe your experience at tu dortmund?the erasmus experience made me feel like a global citizen. it has not only opened my mind but allowed me to take responsibility of my capacity. i developed an understand of how to work with people from different cultures and backgrounds. the erasmus experience gave me new perspectives and a sense of belonging to a global community. i became more mature and confident as a result of the semester aboard experience.
 what is your best memory of your internship exchange? i had a plenty of memories in my exchange period in germany. i had made quite number of friends from different nationalities. but one of my best memories has to be the visit to the signal iduna park which is the biggest football stadium in europe. i event attended few games and got a chance to see messi live.
 what was your biggest surprise going to germany? one of the biggest surprises i faced after going to germany has to be the with money transactions. in sweden i never carried any cash when going to any stores. all the transactions were made with card. but in germany it was actually reverse cash is the king there. most of the stores dont accept cards and life becomes very difficult  without cash. i faced very difficulties at the beginning and then got used to the lifestyle there over time.  what have been your greatest challenges? one of greatest challenged i experienced in germany is communicating with the native german people. most of the people dont understand or speak english. it makes it difficult to get basic things done without german language skills. but at the same time erasmus exchange program gave me an opportunity to deepen my german language skills and i have completed 2 levels during my abroad stay at the university.
 what do you miss about your exchange period? i miss all the wonderful friends i have made over there. and i will also miss the street food in the christmas market
 sexual violence against women international human rights humanitarian law women and politics
 university west scholarships
 every year university west offers a limited number of scholarships to feepaying masters students. the scholarships are awarded based on academic excellence.
 the university west scholarship covers 25 percent of the tuition fee. the recipients of these scholarships will have their tuition fee waived by 25 for the whole programme length provided that the study results during the first semester and or the first year are satisfactory.
 citizens of a country outside the eueea and switzerland who pay tuition fees
 admitted to an oncampus masters programme at university west
 motivation letter submitted with programme application
 the application fee and supporting documents received before the deadline
 the scholarship is only available for oncampus programmes. the scholarship is not available for distance learning programmes
 awarding procedure
 the scholarship committee is overall responsible for the principles of the scholarships and decides every year on how to distribute the funds available the structure of the scholarships and which students will be awarded.
 the departmentsfaculties rank applicants based on the criteria listed below and present their choices to the scholarship committee. the committee makes the final decision.
 study result from previous education
 applicants motivation for being part of the programme
 applicants priority of the programme in the national application round
 relevant projects internships international exposure and work experience
 a decision made by the scholarship committee is not open for appeal.
 students applying for a masters programme starting autumn 2024 can apply for a university west scholarship from 1 november 2023 to february 2024.
 you can apply for a scholarship by filling out the online application form and uploading your cv.
 scholarship applicants will be notified about the scholarship committees decision on 1 april 2024 at the latest.
 swedish institute si scholarships
 you can find the tuition fees for each of our programmes on the programme pages which you find here. you will pay the tuition fee per semester.
 eueea and swiss citizens do not pay tuition fees.
 guidelines for application fees and tuition fees
 university west has guidelines for registration fees and tuition fees for feepaying student. please read it first before completing the online form below.
 here you can find the application for refund of fuition fee.
 tuti  early detection early intervention
 two new honorary doctors at university west
 elisabeth ohlson artist photographer and theater director and hanne smidt södergård senior advisor at the european university association have been appointed honorary doctors at university west. honorary doctors are appointed to honor individuals who have made contributions that have or have had great significance for university west.
 the nomination for elisabeth ohlson points in particular to that she has in a unique way contributed to university wests inclusive work to actively work to increase norm awareness in society and raise awareness of the consequences of norms for equality in society. ohlson is known for her questionable art. through her artistic work elisabeth ohlson has strongly contributed to students from university west in their future professions have a normcritical awareness and a normcritical approach. furthermore it is emphasized that elisabeth ohlson as an honorary doctor can continue to support and further develop the normcritical perspective in all higher education programs at the university and thus contribute to the universitys mission to contribute to shaping democratic citizens with a critical approach.
 my work over the past 30 years has been about portraying and highlight prejudices against people who live outside the norm. by reinterpreting historical already existing works of art i want to disrupt the viewers thoughts. it has been a messy journey through hatred and threats. but i also feel great humility to all the people whose trust i have received all who have participated and posed in my pictures. being appointed an honorary doctor at university west is not only an honor for me but a signal to everyone who lives in exclusion that norms can change says elisabeth ohlson in a comment.
 elisabeth ohlson photo private
 hanne smidt södergård is appointed honorary doctor at university west 2022 in light of the crucial efforts she has made since 2015 in terms of quality development and strategic future work for the university. hanne smidt södergård has with efforts far beyond what is expected within the framework of her assignment contributed to learning within university west in important key areas such as broadened recruitmentbroadened participation validationassessment of prior learning evaluationquality assurance regarding education and processes for strategic partnership. she actively promotes and involves university west in her international networks and has contributed with crucial contacts and project initiatives in several areas.
 the doctoral award ceremony will take place at the upcoming academic ceremony at university west 11 november 2022.
 contact martin hellström vicechancellor university west martin.hellstrom@hv.se 46 739 01 33 51elisabeth ohlson 46 708 14 42 42hanne smidt södergård 46 768 24 06 01
 mathias lundin ceo of svetskommissionen and stephen billett professor of adult and vocational education griffith university australia have been appointed honorary doctorates at university west. honorary doctors are appointed to honor individuals who have made contributions that have or have had great significance for university west and these two have a strong connection to the universitys two areas of strength production technology and workintegrated learning.
 mathias lundin and stephen billett are strongly connected to to the universitys two areas of strength production technology and workintegrated learning.
 the nomination for mathias lundin points in particular to
 through his extensive work and commitment mathias lundin has made a significant contribution to university wests operations especially in teaching and standardization of welding. with great competence and passion he has among other things taught where he has played a central role in conveying knowledge about the complex and technical aspects of welding. through their efforts the students have gained a deeper understanding of the requirements and standards that govern the welding industry which has prepared them well for future professional practice. his commitment has had a profound impact on swedens industry. through his work he has created important links between academia and industry which has fostered collaboration and innovation. mathias lundin has also been a strong advocate for education and skill development in welding.
 i am very honored and grateful for the appointment. i also see it as recognition of an important industry for the development of swedish industry. i am really passionate about the meeting between academia and industry. i hope to continue the efforts of this crossfertilizing collaboration with even more vigor through this appointment says mathias lundin.
 nomination for stephen billett specifically points to the following
 23 years of the uddevalla symposium 1998  2020
 see our film summing up the years 1998  2020
 ukä evaluates university wests work with broadened recruitment
 broadened recruitment is about reaching out to students who to a lesser extent seek higher education. examples of factors that come into play are parents educational background geography and gender. ukä has now evaluated how university west works with broadened recruitment.
 according to the higher education act all higher education institutions have the task of working with broadened recruitment. this means that all swedish universities must work actively to reach a different group of students than those who normally would apply to study at the university.
 usually broadened recruitment focuses on reaching students who do not come from an academic background explains hanna gadd head of sbip and expert in ukäs evaluation of broadened recruitment. even though more and more people are applying to study at universities there are still a lower percentage of students who do not come from an academic home.
 but broadened recruitment can also focus on other things such as geography.
 the work with broadened recruitment differs between universities and between programmes. at the programme level the work with broadened recruitment is often focused on gender. gadd says that for example investments in broadened recruitment are common to attract women to the more technical educations while it is more rare with investments to try to get men to apply to study nursing.
 ukä has evaluated the universitys work
 by evaluating the work with broadened recruitment ukä wants to create an opportunity to analyze and evaluate the work done at universities around the country to define strengths weaknesses opportunities and challenges and to provide feedback on the work.
 ukäs evaluation shows that university west has come a long way within the work with broadened recruitment. for example ökad högskoleövergång increased higher education transition  link in swedish is highlighted as a positive example of how collaboration can be part of the work with broadened recruitment. the work done within the group framgångsrika studier successful studies  link in swedish which aims to give all students equal opportunities to complete their studies is also highlighted.
 we have a number of projects and activities that ukä had viewed positively when we received our recommendations says gadd. but we must also be able to show that these activities make a difference.
 the evaluation shows that the university must have a better system when it comes to broadened recruitment.
 we have to get better at proving that we do good things gadd explains. today we can not show that we are good at broadening recruitment through followup. so we need to get better at targeting our work and then evaluating it  so that we can show which activities actually led to which result.
 at university west the focus in the near future will be on reviewing ukäs recommendations.
 the recommendations we have received are very clear says gadd and continues we believe that we do not need to change so much in how we work. we just have to get better at demonstrating the good work we do.
 one goal is to hire someone parttime to work with broadened recruitment. the person in question will work to create a better system and with concrete tasks linked to broadened recruitment and broadened participation.
 ukä will not carry out any further evaluation. however in the spring of 2024 they will follow up to see if the recommendations they have suggested have led to improvements.
 ukr online application
 please enter your details for application below. you must complete all fields in order to submit your application.
 your familylast name
 your date of birth
 period of study
 area of studies at home university
 courses you wish to apply for
 upload your transcript of records
 proof of english language skills
 virtual care for the virtually dying
 ulf andersson anh truong
 challenges in designing virtual environments training social skills for children with autism
 problem solving reflection and lifelong learning in the junction between theory and practice
 informatics and media production
 key competenses education and application of cadcamcae
 presentation ulf 8 mars.pdf
 cardiac selfefficacy and fatigue one year postmyocardial infarction
 district nurses experiences of practice in caring for people with mental illhealth in swedish primary care.
 balancing between a personcentred and a common staff approach  nursing staffs experiences of good nursing practice for patients who selfharm
 time together as an arena for mental health nursing  staff experiences of introducing and participating in a nursing intervention in psychiatric inpatient care
 callosotomy in children  parental experiences reported at longterm followup
 nurses experiences of assessing suicide risk in specialised mental health outpatient care in rural areas
 methodological challenges in qualitative content analysis  a discussion paper.
 parental experiences before and longterm after their childrens hemispherotomy  a populationbased qualitative study
 evaluation of a webbased training program for professional carers working with people with learning disabilities and challenging behavior  a pilot study with sseddesign.
 personcentred information to parents in paediatric oncology the pifbo study  a study protocol of an ongoing rct.
 participation confirmation and challenges  how nursing staff experience the daily conversations nursing intervention in psychiatric inpatient care
 experiences of emotional and psychosocial functioning after frontal lobe resection for epilepsy.
 rather a competent practitioner than a compassionate healer  patients satisfaction with interactions in psychiatric inpatient care.
 abstraction and interpretation during the qualitative content analysis process
 patients experiences of isolation in psychiatric inpatient care  insights from a metaethnographic study.
 understanding the incomprehensible  patients and spouses experiences of comprehensibility before at and after diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
 wearables in epilepsy and parkinsons disease  a focus group study
 until death do us part  adult relatives experiences of everyday life close to persons with mental illhealth
 patients expectations and experiences of epilepsy surgery  a populationbased longterm qualitative study
 deputy vicechancellor and director
 ulrika teaches at the doctoral program in work integrated learning. she has supervised 12 doctoral students for their dissertation and is currently the main supervisor of 3 doctoral students in informatics and workintegrated learning.
 codify or collaborate  from expert systems to systems of expert in manufacturing domains
 codifying knowledge
 different approaches to evaluation of information systems
 challenges for knowledge communities in technical work domains
 codify or collaborate  from expert systems to systems of experts for knowledge creation in manufacturing
 degree of digitalization and citizen satisfaction  a study of the role of local egovernment in sweden
 cocreation and finetuning of boundary resources in smallscale platformization
 characterizing the laptoper  the sustainability struggle of onlineness content curation and visibility
 cocreation in a boundary practice  lessons learned from an engaged scholarship approach
 design experience from experience design  towards strategies for enhancements
 abstraction mimesis and the evolution of deep learning
 conceptualizing industrial workplace learning  an information systems perspective
 challenges towards knowledge communities in technical domains adding culture to knowledge management
 crossing boundaries through workintegrated knowledge communities
 blast from the past  when knowledge met computers
 computer supported knowledge management.
 designing with rather than for  on the relevance joy and importance of collaborative engaged work in the design process of a home care mobile service
 boundary dialogues in usercentric innovation
 dynamics in a innovation boundary context  exploring an living lab process from a community of practice perspective
 an interactive visualization model for competence management  an integrative approach
 continuing professional development by practitioner integrated learning
 understanding of laser welding phenomena
 by using simulation to investigate the influence of process parameters on the laser weld pool within stipulated process windows it allows for optimization of certain geometrical constraints. in this way material configuration and combinations can be selected to optimize e.g. strength which in turn results in lower weight and lower fuel consumption and less environmental impact.
 the elaborated manufacturing method provides the prerequisites for better quality and lowered cost. swedish aeroengine industry is today focusing on fabricated load carrying static structures allowing a more flexible design and manufacturing. the development of the manufacturing method and its automation require a comprehensive understanding of the complete process. the purpose of the project is to gain deeper process understanding and thus optimization capability.
 understanding the course list
 in order to understand the setup of the course list you need to understand
 how our academic year is structured at university west
 what study pace means and how it works
 two semesters  two study periods per semester
 the academic year at university west is divided into two semesters
 each semester is then divided into two study periods sp running over 10 weeks each
 autumn semester is divided into study period 1 and 2 sp 1 and sp 2 spring semester is divided into study period 3 and 4 sp 3 and sp 4
 study period 1 runs during the first 10 weeks of the autumn semester and study period 2 runs over the remaining 10 weeks of the same semester.
 study period 3 runs during the first 10 weeks of the spring semester and study period 4 runs over the remaining 10 weeks of the same semester.
 study period and study pace
 each course runs in a certain study period over a certain period of time at a certain pace.
 some courses are given as fulltime studies 100 and some as parttime 50 or 25.
 if i choose a 75 credit course given at fulltime this means that it will run for five weeks including examination.
 but not all courses run as fulltime. many of our courses run at halftime 50 which means that you study two courses simultaneously for ten weeks for example during the first study period of the semester. this means that during these ten weeks you will also do the examination of the same two courses. when you go on to study the second part of the semester the second study period you will then start participating in two new courses for the last ten weeks.
 more information and examples on study period and study pace
 study pace examples
 fulltime 100 study pace is fulltime which means that a course on 75 credits will run for five weeks during the semester and a 15 credit course will run for a full study period 10 weeks.
 below we have listed two examples of fulltime courses  one at 75 credits and one at 15 credits.
 example 1 the course international economics 75 credits runs at fulltime. you can see this in the course list by looking at the column pace of study where it says 100.
 if you click on the course in the course list and select the section study path you can see that it runs in study period 4 section a. this means that the course starts in study period 4 and runs fulltime during the first five weeks of this study period sp4a
 example 2the course power gender ethnicity and other inequalities 15 credits also runs at fulltime.
 if you click on the course in the course list and select the section study path you can see that it runs in study period 3 section a and b both. this means that the course starts in study period 3  at the start of the spring semester  and runs fulltime during the whole of study period 3 ten weeks
 parttime not all courses run at full time. many of our course run at halftime 50 and some less than that 25.
 if i take a course on 75 credits running at halftime 50 it means that it does not run for five weeks as a fulltime course would have done  but at 10 weeks. in other words a halftime course at 75 credits will run for a whole study period. that is why many students take two courses per study period as they will in total amount to fulltime studies.
 halftime examples
 below we have listed two examples of halftime courses.
 example 1the course cad 75 credits runs at halftime. you can see this in the course list by looking at the column pace of study where it says 50 for 50.
 if you click on the course in the course list and select the section study path you can see that it runs in study period 3 section a and b. this means that the course starts in study period 3  at the start of the spring semester  and runs at halftime pace during the whole of the study period.
 example 2the course quality project 75 credits also runs at halftime.
 if you click on the course in the course list and select the section study path you can see that it runs in study period 4 section a and b. this means that the course starts in study period 4 and runs at halftime pace during the whole of the study period.
 most part time courses run at 50 but some courses also run at 25. this means that a 75 credit course running at 25 will run during the whole semester 20 weeks.
 jacobs foundation usa
 ring p. s.  van de ven a. h. 1992. structuring cooperative relationships between organisations. strategic management journal 137 483489.
 schools and digitalization is one of the area that 25 doctoral and licentiate students are studying.
 were right on cue here and we meet a societal need by focusing on an everchanging learning process. this field seems to be interesting to a lot of people.
 but both lars and kristina point out that growth must occur wisely and at a reasonable pace.
 for example its important that we can ensure that the doctoral and licentiate students we admit have skilled supervisors which in turn means the university must actively work with initiatives for allowing staff to obtain credentials and update expertise and for recruiting new staff says kristina.
 ten students in external organisations
 working with thirdparty doctoral and licentiate students is an intentional choice that fits well with the universitys strong emphasis on collaboration.
 this means were trying to create new knowledge together with others to enhance the impact and impression we make on society says lars.
 aiming to increase internationalisation
 the doctoral and licentiate students have positions within the nu hospital group närhälsan and campus västervik while some of them are shared with other higher education institutions such as the swedish defence university. university west is also collaborating with higher education institutions outside of sweden including two such partnerships at the central university of technology in south africa.
 we want to increase international collaboration moving forward. this also means increasing mobility for our swedish doctoral and licentiate students  and increasing exchanges with other countries and international networks says lars.
 he says this is necessary given the global societal challenges we are facing.
 our ambition must be to provide our doctoral and licentiate students with the biggest international network possible and for their daily work to take place in a global context. for example i would like to see university west running an international wil graduate school in the future.
 how would you describe your experience at university carlo cattaneo in italy? i would describe it as worthwhile and a lot of fun.
 what is your best memory of your internship exchange?  its difficult to choose just one memory but i must say all the trips we took during the weekends. italy has many beautiful places to discover and many are just a short train ride away. going by train was also very cheap so that was perfect. a journey was when we went to venice it was so nice. take the opportunity to discover the country you are in so that you can also take a break from the studies.
 what was your biggest surprise going to italy?  my biggest surprise was that the university is in such a small town. before i left i didnt know much about the university or the town because it had been a quick decision that i took to go on an exchange. a small town can also be an advantage you became closer to everybody who lived at campus and we came up with many things to do together.
 what has been your greatest challenges?  the biggest challenge was to live so far away from family friends and the security i have at home. even studying courses in english and organizing the studies since all the courses and the exams were at the same time.
 what do you miss about your exchange period?  i miss all the amazing people i met during my exchange and the warmer climate. but also the italian food especially the aperitivo.
 interview with adrian in english
 what did you think of the university? i.e. what was the courses like your teachers at the university carlo cattaneo in italy i studied courses that made it possible for me to transfer the credits for the courses i would have taken at home. i also got the chance to study two elective courses where italian was one of them.  i experienced the teachers as very committed and that they had their own relevant experience. as a student at a new university and country i experienced the organization as very unclear as the available information was limited. however it was not too difficult to learn how everything worked as people got very involved and helpful when asked.
 how did you experience your accommodation and life on campus?we lived two and two in a corridor room with a shared kitchen. i was lucky enough to end up with a roommate with whom i got along very well. however the costs on campus were high in relation to what you got for example it cost 5 euros for a machine wash.
 tell us how you experienced studying in another country possibly. both negative and positive also something about social contacts and socializing with those you have met? studying in italy was very convenient as it is very quick and cheap to get through the whole country by train. i have also made friends from other countries that i still meet from time to time. the only thing i see as negative are the courses i missed here at home as industrial economics is a program where the courses are very much based on each other. however i feel that my studies abroad outweigh what i missed here at home as i expanded my social network while experiencing italy.  something that is positive is that i passed all the courses in italy and that i got to read the courses in english. i am in the final stage of my three year program in industrial economics and it is time to start with a degree project and i hope that the courses i studied in italy will be useful for that.
 any advice to other students wanting to apply for exchange studies?  for those who plan to study abroad i strongly recommend being out in good time with planning to pause your life at home in sweden. by that i mean for example termination  freezing of a gym card finding a tenant for the apartment making sure you have a passport and so on.
 the universitys administrative operational support is gathered in a joint administration.
 the administration is responsible for support and service to management employees students and collaboration partners. the administrations assignments as operational support are
 to proactively conduct development work of administrative processes related to the universitys prioritized development areas.
 to provide support and prepare matters for management and the university board.
 university director and head of university administration li lejerstedt university directordeputy university director rickard norén  assistant university director liselott lycke
 human resources including student health
 service and it sit
 student service unit is organized by student service and library.
 university board
 the university board is the universitys highest governing body. the board is responsible for the allocation of resources strategy and policy. eight members are appointed by the swedish government and they are representing society and business.
 the board also includes vice chancellor three representatives of the teachers and three representatives of the students. the board also includes representatives of the unions and they have right to attend and speak.
 margareta wallin peterson
 teacher representatives
 secretary
 university west becomes european university
 the application by the stars eu alliance to become a european university has been approved by the european union. the decision was made by the european commission on monday july 3. the total funding for the alliance amounts to 124 million euros.
 university west in one of nine partners of stars eu. it is an existing alliance of universities from all parts of europe who share the same european values and who want to contribute to a sustainable future for europe and the world. by sharing our knowledge and ideas stars eu empowers people and society to learn and grow.
 the grant received by stars eu will support the alliance to expand and implement its longterm vision to create structural societal impact on a local interregional and international scale. the goal of the alliance is to accelerate regional transformation toward a more sustainable future.
 the alliance has brought together academic staff of different disciplines and universities within thematic interest groups. but stars eu is not a closed alliance. instead external stakeholders have been invited to the activities of the stars eu regional transition accelerator where the goal is to help regions speed up the transition to a more digital and sustainable society.
 for more information please contact
 jan theliander acting vicechancellor
 what is a european university?
 the european commission approved seven new alliances under the 2023 erasmus european universities call which add to the ones previously funded in earlier calls. after this call there are a total of fifty european universities.
 stars eu contributes to implement the european universities initiative one of the activities through which the eu aims to create a european high education area. the eu encourages international alliances between different european universities aiming to promote european values and identity as well as strengthen the quality and competitiveness of european higher education.
 hanze university of applied sciences the netherlandspolytechnic institute of braganca portugalbremen university of applied sciences germanyuniversity of la laguna spain silesian university in opava czechiacracow university of technology polanduniversity of franchecomté francealeksandër moisiu university albania
 university west digital campus reception
 university west digital campus reception 2021
 please enter your details below to sign up for the digital campus reception at university west 7th september 2021.
 online registration
 name of higher education institution
 department at university west with which you have your main collaboration
 department of nursing health and culture
 welcome to university west digital campus tour 2021
 university west is arranging a campus reception for all partner universities with the ambition of giving you and your colleagues an opportunity to meet us to see our campus to let you get acquainted with our departments and get information on courses ongoing projects and international activities.
 the event takes place on tuesday the 7th september 2021 at 0900 local time cet1 gmt2.
 all participants will receive a link by email closer to the event.
 please find a full event programme attached below.
 900  1000                          welcome  this is university west                                                    vice chancellor prof. martin hellström
 todays event                                                    maria macdonald international office
 university west and trollhättan student city                                                    chairman of the student union paulina samuelsson                                                    international student madeleine hoffman                                                    exchange student simona de tullio
 university west internationalisation strategy 20202023                                                    senior advisor strategic internationalisation gunnar peterson
 school of business economics and it                                                    department of health sciences                                                    department of social and behavioural studies                                                    department of engineering sciences
 1100  1130                         towards the future  university west campus development project                                                    university director li lejerstedt
 not signed up yet?
 university west digitizes and develops education in electric vehicles
 the courses are part of the band new master in electric vehicle engineering but students can also read the courses separately. the three new webbased courses with a total of 12.5 hp are electric drivetrains power electronics and emc. the masters programme is aimed at both national and international students on campus and at a distance.
 the courses have the same qualification requirement as for mechanical engineers and are aimed among other things at mechanical engineers who want to retrain to be able work with the electrification of the transport sector. the courses start in the autumn of 2021 and in the spring of 2022 respectively.
 more about the programme where the courses are included.
 contact boel ekergård program manager university west
 university west has the best application process in the world
 that according to the global student satisfaction awards 2023 where university west was awarded the admission process award. this award shows that we are on the right track and should continue working in the same direction says tomas bengtsson director of international affairs.
 yesterday university west in trollhättan sweden was awarded at the global student satisfaction awards 2023 securing the admission process award for having the best and most supportive admissions process as judged by students.
 the global student satisfaction awards is based on reviews from over 120000 students worldwide the worlds most comprehensive university satisfaction survey conducted by studyportals unibuddy and the british council ielts. it serves as a platform for students to acknowledge universities that excel in providing quality education and in university wests case a hasslefree admission process.
 university wests victory highlights the commitment to simplifying the journey to higher education.
 we believe in the importance of a personal approach and we work extensively on providing personal and prompt responses so that our prospective students can come wellprepared to us says tomas bengtsson director of international affairs at university west. this award shows that we are on the right track and should continue working in the same direction. i would also like to thank studyportals for this fantastic recognition.
 the global student satisfaction awards 2023 winners were revealed on october 18th. present via link was university wests vicechancellor mats jägstam. in his acceptance speech he emphasized the importance of a smooth application process with the right support  it empowers students and helps them make the right choice when it comes to higher education.
 university west was the only swedish university awarded during yesterdays ceremony. other universities who were also awarded were
 university of navarra spain for overall satisfaction
 university of klagenfurt austria for student diversity
 university of the people us for online classroom experience
 semmelweis university hungary for quality of student life
 denison university us for studentteacher interaction
 dublin city university ireland for career development
 university west hosted the industrial graduate schools fall seminar
 last week around 30 of the participants in the industrial graduate school smart industry sweden met to network and discuss current issues. the autumn seminar was held this time at university west in trollhättan and included a study visit to the aircraft and space engine manufacturer gkn aerospace.
 the autumn seminar was dominated by dialogue in different groups with a focus on the doctoral students assignments and challenges.
 there were open and fruitful discussions which i think everyone appreciated. we also highlighted the need to create clarity for all parties involved in the graduate school. clarifying the forms of collaboration between doctoral students companies and universities can for example involve developing practical guidelines for how collaboration can be carried out says lennart malmsköld university west.
 the program also included an interesting lecture by professor evert agneholm on challenges linked to the ongoing electrification in sweden. the seminar ended with a study visit and presentations at gkn aerospace. here fredrik wallin product strategy  business innovation manager talked about the companys sustainability strategy and amanda dalstam data  analytics project leader described how they work with digitization of production.
 reflections on the day
 viktor döhlén industrial phd student in power electronics at sollefteåforsen abmid sweden university
 the doctoral students balance between two worlds. both the company and the university have high expectations for results. it can be difficult for the doctoral students to parry and know how to prioritize their working time. these meetings are good opportunities to talk about the challenges and to support each other in different ways.
 smart industry sweden meets the needs of cuttingedge expertise in swedish industry to strengthen the companies competitiveness and innovativeness. 16 doctoral students 12 industrial companies and five universities participate in the industrial graduate school university of skövde halmstad university jönköping university mid sweden university and university west. the industrial graduate school is financed by the kk foundation. more about smart industry sweden
 it is a very wellestablished conference in informatics. the conference is usually held in the usa every two years and in another country every two years. so being able to arrange this large conference at university west in trollhättan sweden is a real trophy for the university and the city says amir hajbolouri associate professor in informatics at university west and responsible for the conference together with matti rossi from aalto university in finland.
 the world has undergone a rapid development of technological innovation in recent decades. the consensus is that our current way of living and interacting with people organizations and society is strongly influenced by the consequences of digital technology.
 four keynotes
 four keynote speakers are booked and there are two from academia sandeep purao professor of computer information systems bentley university usa and mikael wiberg professor of informatics umeå university sweden. there are also two keynote speakers from the industry and they are freddy lund and christian döbeln from tenstar simulations.
 registration opens on march 1.
 to the conference page where there are also contact details
 learn more about us in your preferred language.
 university west invests in hybrid teaching
 hybrid teaching as a concept has been introduced during the pandemic. the corona outbreak meant that university west had to switched to digital teaching overnight. however this development goes hand in hand with the universitys goal of reaching more students by offering them to take part in teaching in different ways  on campus online or a mix of both alternatives.
 it has previously been difficult to create balance for the students who are present digitally compared to those who are present physically on campus. we want to change this so that it becomes an equal experience for those who attend digitally. in this way we create greater flexibility for students who normally have difficulty participating in higher education says lars johansson head of the division educational development and study counselling and subproject manager in the infrastructure project for hybrid teaching.
 tell us about the infrastructure project you are working on
 the infrastructure project creates the conditions needed for us to rebuild classrooms to handle hybrid teaching. it is about providing new and developed possibilities for what you can do in a classroom. through the project we can create a greater digital presence in the regular classrooms. hybrid teaching is not always the best alternative but where pedagogy allows it we want to offer the opportunity to participate on as equal terms as possible. we start with some programmes so that we can then learn what we can improve.
 paulina samuelsson head of the student unionwhat do you think hybrid teaching will mean for the students?
 hybrid teaching and more flexible studies is positive in many aspects. students can participate at a distance if they cannot participate on campus. students are not a homogeneous group so i believe that hybrid teaching will have different meanings for the students.
 the work with the infrastructure project is closely linked to the campus development that is currently underway at the university and there is a particularly close connection to the subproject learning environments.
 we now have a unique opportunity to test new ways of working and new technology before we move on to a larger scale of changing our learning environments in connection to the campus development project based on campus plan 2030. we want to create a campus where our students enjoy spending time says lars johansson.
 the pandemic has provided new experiences
 lars johansson believes that our teaching and pedagogical leadership has changed during the pandemic. he points out that both teachers and students now have lots of digital experience.
 i think that our students will question when physical presence is required to a greater extent in the future. if we want to be an attractive university we need to be able to offer a larger digital presence where it is pedagogically possible it is an important experience that has come with the pandemic. we also work with accessibility at the university and hybrid teaching opens up for opportunities for more people.
 we have expanded our digital competence we have learned when digital is not enough. the general attitude towards digital participation has also changed we now have greater knowledge and have become better at understanding the digital context.
 the future classroom will need a window to the outside world and the outside world needs to be able to enter the classroom he concludes.
 hybrid halls  the pilot project
 blurs the line between classroom and distance by
 system with microphones that can pick up sound from the entire room.
 ceiling speakers convey sound from students at a distance.
 a number of monitors with different purposes that the teacher can control to create a presence even for those who are not in the room.
 university west joins the iau
 university west has joined the international association of universities iau. the organization brings together members from over 130 countries and among other things works to strengthen the academy and academic freedom.
 many of the topics that iau works with are also ones that university west prioritizes. our membership will give us new perspectives and insights into these areas thereby strengthening us in the strategic work that lies ahead says gunnar peterson senior advisor for strategic internationalization at university west.
 university west management team
 the universitys management team is responsible for the joint management work on strategic issues.
 ulrika lundh snis deputy vicechancellor of wil and operations manager of the complete academic environment of wil
 fredrik sjögren head of department for school of business economics and it
 susanne källerwald head of department for department of health sciences
 per nylén head of department for department of engineering science
 eliasbeth jansson head of department for department of social and behavioural studies
 joel andersson operations manager of the complete academic environment of production technology
 hanna gadd head of study and academic support library and educational development
 agnes johnsson chairman of the student union
 administrative officer                        utredare
 university west on a top 25 international ranking list
 campus at university west trollhättan. photo joachim nywall
 it is of course gratifying although i am not surprised. to collaborate with societal partners in order to jointly produce new knowledge has been with us already from the beginning says martin hellström vicechancellor of university west.
 the top 25 list published yesterday shows which higher education institutions around the world produce the most scientific articles in close collaboration with companies and organizations. university west and chalmers university of technology are the only swedish universities on this years list of top 25 performing universities in copublications with industrial partners. the ranking is based on public information that each higher education institution provides.
 this means a lot to us as a university. it is valuable to show our collaboration partners as well as current and prospective students how we perform in an international comparison says gunnar peterson senior advisor strategic internationalization at university west.
 umultirank produces ranking lists every year. in 2021 1948 higher education institutions in 97 countries participate. 45 of them are situated in sweden. the survey is divided into several different categories where coproduction of scientific articles is one. the results form the basis for the site  where students partners and societal actors can easily compare different universities based on different parameters.
 umultirank is the organisation that includes the most higher education institutions in its rankings. corresponding rankings normally include 400500 higher education institutions. this year a total of nine swedish universities are highlighted in the various categories including the kth royal institute of technology chalmers university of technology and stockholm school of economics.
 university west starts collaborations with universities in kenya uganda and cameroon
 the meeting was really interesting. being able to meet representatives from three different african higher education institutions and gain insight into their goals and conditions for cooperation creates a good basis for developing our cooperation with africa says per nylén.
 more about university wests international collaboration
 university west tops this autumns international masters program
 among colleges and universities in sweden today there are fewer applicants in total for this autumns international masters program but university west stands out and instead increases by about 50 percent.
 for the autumn term 3705 students had applied for the various international masters programs that university west offers compared with the autumn of 2021 when there were 2471 applicants.
 since 2019 we have worked strategically on international student recruitment and built a recruitment network in selected focus areas says tomas bengtsson. he is responsible for the universitys international student recruitment.
 over the years university west has developed a digital approach since the pandemic began by using webinars. google adwords and social media have also been used in recruitment.
 in work with the internal processes we have adapted everything from program presentations to how we have contact with potential students from the first contact until they apply are accepted and finally startup as students at hv says tomas.
 we are constantly developing new and existing programs to become attractive to potential applicants which is done in collaboration with companies and the industry.
 trollhättan is home to a number of hightech companies such as gkn aerospace producing jet engines and developing rocket engine technology and nevs national electric vehicle sweden  developing its platform for the future generation of electric cars in the former saab automobile factory. in fact 90 of the worlds aeroplanes contain parts manufactured in trollhättan. the school venue and participants accommodation will be conveniently located close to the city centre eliminating need for timeconsuming and costly transportation.
 it is also part of the production technology centre ptc which is run in partnership with university west innovatum technology park and the manufacturing industry of the region. more information
 university west admits 91 more students to its masters programmes
 university west admits 615 new international students to the autumn semester of 2022. this is an increase of 91 compared to last year and the second largest increase in all of sweden.
 the selection for university wests masters programmes has now been completed and the first students have received their admission notices.
 615 new masters students have been accepted to start their studies at university west by the autumn of 2022. last year the equivalent figure was 322 which means an increase of 91 this year. with a record increase university west ranks second for largest increase in the country.
 it feels great that we are starting to see results in our investment to become more international says tomas bengtsson director international affairs at university west. work has now begun on guiding the admitted students so that they can prepare for their studies here in trollhättan in the best possible way.
 nationally the number of admissions has increased by 6.7 writes the swedish council for higher education.
 many of university wests international masters programmes are still open for late application. here you can see our programmes open for late application. this means that the final number of students admitted to the university is not yet known.
 on april 14 the selection for the international programme in politics and economics ippe will be published.
 university wests new masters program draws global interest
 the masters program in operations and supply chain management at university west is in high demand as the 2024 fall semester approaches attracting interest from students from all over the world.
 this fall the masters program in operations and supply chain management will premiere. tailored to educate the future leaders in supply chain resilience the program will integrate handson learning with theoretical training.
 today supply chains are very complex says programme manager leif magnus jensen. time and again weve witnessed the impact of global events on logistics systems. consider the cargo vessel that was stuck in the suez canal as an example it really highlighted the vulnerability of these supply chains.
 the masters program in operations and supply chain management takes a holistic approach across logistics operations management and information technology. with a focus on sustainable practices and innovations through partnerships with industry leaders aligning with the current and future needs of the evolving job market. making sure students will be in great demand after graduation  both globally and nationally.
 as of now over 150 students from over 30 different counties have been admitted and are set to start their studies in the fall.
 it feels fantastic that we are seeing so much interest in this programme as well as in many of our other programmes says tomas bengtsson director international affairs at university west. it shows that we have attractive offerings.
 other than a variety of cultures the classroom will also be filled with a variety of educational backgrounds. some students may have a background in the field of mechanical engineering and others in economics or informatics.
 its very exciting says programme manager leif magnus jensen. we believe that this is something that will make the programme more interesting for the students. they get the opportunity to work with others from different backgrounds where everyone have a unique perspective and something to contribute to solving problems within the global supply chain for example.
 read more about the programme here.
 gkn aerospace is investing in hydrogen aviation in the new h2jet project which starts on 1 july. hydrogen has been identified as one of the fuels of the future for aviation and now sek 24 million will be invested in the development of key components for hydrogenpowered aircraft engines. university west is one of six collaboration partners.
 university west will contribute with expert knowledge in metallurgy. since hydrogen can have embrittling effects on various metals it will be critical to have full control of aircraft engine parts that will be exposed to hydrogen in the future comments robert pederson professor of material technology.
 we will be able to benefit greatly from gkn aerospaces long experience of working with components for liquid hydrogen for the engines in europes ariane spacecraft and our unique ability in lightweight construction and advanced manufacturing technology.
 this has been an exciting and unusual assignment for us says shrikant joshi professor of thermal spraying at university west. no other university has done anything like this. we are very satisfied with our efforts and everything went as planned. we prepared for the mission in several stages over four years.
 it took four days to coat 36 rectangular surfaces on the target wheel explains university west development engineer stefan björklund. the surfaces have been sprayed with six layers of material undercoat layers and a top layer. three of the 36 surfaces were sprayed with esss newly developed material which it is hoped will provide a longer life and a stronger signature. the target wheel is worth approximately sek 50 million so it was important to have reliable safety margins to ensure that nothing would go wrong.
 invisible protons become visible
 the facility will act as an enormous microscope where neutrons can be used to analyse samples at atomic and molecular levels. in simple terms 5 megawatts of powerful proton beams will be fired at very high speed at a target wheel that looks like a rotating wheel. by coating the target wheel with a fluorescent ceramic surface layer the protons will become visible. the surface layer increases the possibility of obtaining the desired test results while also extending the lifetime of the target wheel.
 additional ess components will be coated in the near future. the collaboration with ess may eventually lead to the creation of a doctoral position to develop a new even better surface layer material.
 read more about the assignment in an article from 2019 in swedish
 the target wheel is masked before spraying. the surfaces to be sprayed are first blasted to ensure good adhesion.
 here the 6tonne target wheel is being loaded.
 about the european spallation source ess
 read article by ess
 upcoming events 2024
 online phd course open for everyone interested in activity theory and work
 see the study guide
 the mooc on key concepts of culturalhistorical activity theory 15 credits will take place from september 16 2024 to december 11 2024.
 the application period will start on august 15 and end on september 1. please notice that it will not be possible to accept registrations before or after these dates and outside the link which will become available on the course webpage.
 the mooc is free of charge
 register for the seminar by 18.11 via
 there will be a preecis 2024 developing activity theory in information studies datis online talk planned for 7 june presented by professor clay spinuzzi from the university of texas at austin us. details are below.
 title of talk fourthgeneration activity theory is about what? thinking through our missions for 4gat
 abstract in the future of activity theory a rough draft 2009 yrjö engeström suggested that a fourth generation of activity theory 4gat might be needed to address social production and peer production in which the boundaries and structures of activity systems seem to fade away. some of us interpreted engeström as addressing postbureaucratic society specifically changes in work organization. but his later work demonstrates that he is instead addressing postmarket society specifically alternatives to capitalism. can a single 4gat address both? and what does is as a field need from a 4gat?
 meeting format        online zoom call
 please email to paul kelly p.kelly@essex.ac.uk to confirm if you will be able to join us for this talk or for any questions about the event.
 this online talk is a special precursor to the datis workshop scheduled for 16 june at the european conference on information systems ecis in paphos cyprus. for more information about the ecis datis workshop see the ecis workshops page here.
 time march 20th 1415 swedish time presenter brett bligh topic wil in university using chat. registration
 time may 22nd 1415 swedish time presenter annalisa sannino topic presenting her book chapter about problem identification in workintegrated learning working with homelessness registration
 time june 16th 9am5pm swedish time event workshop developing activity theory in information studies datisregistration
 time september 26th 1415 swedish time presenter jaakko hillpö topic presenting his work on preschool professionals and work integrated learning with a chat perspective registration
 time october 23rd 1415 swedish time presenter james garraway topic presenting his work on change laboratory with professionals in higher education registration
 time november 20th 1415 swedish time presenter lazaro herrera topic presenting his work in vocational training with a chat perspective registration
 time december 11th 1415 swedish time presenter monika hattinger  topic presenting her work on professional development in the production industry by change laboratory registration
 update of topdesk
 from 1700 on 10 august we will update topdesk to the latest version. estimated downtime is about 3 hours.
 we are updating the printing system papercut.this makes it impossible to print copy or scan.
 everything should work again 1300
 we are about to start an exciting project to upgrade our hybrid classrooms.
 we built our first hybrid classroom back in 2019 and since then we have constructed 10 more. over these years we have discussed the functions and solutions of hybrid classrooms with teachers and students. this feedback along with the desire for new features has led to various generations of hybrid classrooms. we are now addressing these variations by upgrading our older classrooms to match the current standard. this work will continue until christmas.
 examples of updates
 the naming of cameras and settings will be in english.
 the ability to switch images between the main and side screens.
 same color theme for the control panel.
 a single side screen for digital participants instead of two
 stephen billet professor of adult and vocational education griffith university australien
 introduction to unlocking regional innovation and entrepreneurship  the potential for increasing capacities
 introduction diversity innovation and clusters  spatial perspectives
 geography open innovation and entrepreneurship  new horizons in regional science series
 innovation and entrepreneurship in the global economy  knowledge technology and internationalization
 spatial knowledge spillovers in europe  a metaanalysis
 accessibility to rampd  a reexamination of the consequences for invention and innovation
 swedish perspectives on creative cities
 entrepreneurial knowledge technology and the transformation of regions  an introduction
 regression analysis and time use data  a comparison of microeconometric approaches with data from the swedish time use survey hus
 imports rampd and local patent production
 interpretation of subjective symptoms in doubleblind placebocontrolled food challenges  interobserver reliability
 spatial econometrics  methods and applications
 accessibility to rampd on patent production
 regional knowledge accessibility and regional economic growth
 spatial spillovers of knowledge production  an accessibility approach
 accessibility to rampd and patent production
 diversity innovation and clusters  spatial perspectives
 introduction  geography open innovation and entrepreneurship
 explaining variations in regional housing prices  an accessibility approach
 accessibility  an underused analytical and empirical tool in spatial economics
 regression analysis and time use data  a comparison of microeconometric approaches with data from the swedish time use survey
 knowledgeflows knowledge externalities and regional economic development
 operationalizing the performance of a tourism network  a case study of network limfjorden denmark
 invention innovation and regional growth in swedish regions
 a monte carlo simulation study of tobit models
 regional growth and accessibility to knowledge resources a study of swedish municipalities
 human capital and productivity in a spatial economic system
 on the specification of regression models with spatial dependence  an application of the accessibility concept
 spatial dependence and the representation of space in empirical models
 följande studier presenterades och diskuteradesidentifying summer season segments on the swedish west coast  the case of lysekilav tobias arvemo  ellinor torsein phd school of business economics and it university west trollhättan sweden.
 stakeholder collaboration for place innovation  challenges and visions in local regenerationirene bernhard phd anna karin olsson phd  ulrika lundh snis associate professor school of business economics and it university west trollhättan sweden.
 experiencing retail or retailing experiences  place innovative synergies in city centersmalin lindberg associate professor luleå university of technology luleå sweden kristina johansson senior lecturer luleå university of technology sweden helena karlberg ceo piteå science park sweden and johanna balogh business promotor piteå science park sweden.dessa studier kommer att publiceras i en konferensantologi under höstenvintern 2018 av högskolan väst.
 pris för främsta kandidatuppsats i marknadsföring gick 2018 till de franska studenterna valentin coppin och louis sellier millennials socially responsible consumption. ur motiveringenthe authors address those people who reached their young adulthood around the turn of the 21st century. they studied patterns of as well as motivations for socially responsible consumption among representatives of this generation in both france and sweden. the findings show differences in socially responsible consumption among different groups of millennials with relation to age and disposable income as well as explain the young adults motivation to consume in such a way highlighting the importance of biospheric motives.
 bernhard i.  olsson a.k. 2020. network collaboration for local and regional developmentthe case of swedish women entrepreneurs. international journal of entrepreneurship and small business 414 pp.539561.
 bernhard i. olsson a k.  lundh snis u. 2020 inclusive place innovation as a means for local community regeneration in bernhard i. gråsjö u. and charlie karlsson c.  eds. diversity innovation and clusters  spatial perspectivescheltenham uk and northampton ma usa edward elgar publishing pp. 5780.
 snis u.l. bernhard i.  olsson a.k. 2020. stakeholder involvement in city transformation towards a smart old town. egovcedemepart 2020 p.347.
 snis u. olsson a.k.  bernhard i 2020.  becoming a smart old town  how to manage stakeholder collaboration and cultural heritage journal of cultural heritage management and sustainable development forthcoming
 bernhard i.  olsson a.k. 2019. understanding women entrepreneurs encounters with an increasingly digitalized workplace. in the 22nd uddevalla symposium 2729 june 2019 laquila italy pp. 7389. university west.
 arvemo t.  torsein e. 2018. identifying summer season segments on the swedish west coast the case of lysekil. in uddevalla symposium 2018 diversity innovation entrepreneurshipregional urban national and international perspectives the 21 uddevalla symposium 1416 june 2018 luleå sweden pp. 5973. university west.
 bernhard i. olsson a.k.  lundh snis u. 2018. stakeholder collaboration for place innovation challenges and visions in local regeneration. in uddevalla symposium 2018 diversity innovation entrepreneurshipregional urban national and international perspectives the 21 uddevalla symposium 1416 june 2018 luleå sweden pp. 127145. university west.
 lundh snis u. olsson a.k.  bernhard i. 2017 the old town district not just a scenic backdrop  stakeholders perspectives in urban regenerationingår i uddevalla symposium 2017 innovation entrepreneurship and industrial dynamics in internationalized regional economies revised papers first presented at the 20th uddevalla symposium 1517 june 2017 trollhättan sweden  ed iréne bernhard trollhättan university west  2017 111127 s.
 bernhard i.  olsson a.k. 2017. women entrepreneurs in local community networks participation challenges and place developmentingår i uddevalla symposium 2017 innovation entrepreneurship and industrial dynamics in internationalized regional economies revised papers first presented at the 20th uddevalla symposium 1517 june 2017 trollhättan sweden  ed iréne bernhard trollhättan university west  2017 129147 s.
 arvemo t.  torsein e. 2017. late season tourists on the swedish west coastingår i uddevalla symposium 2017 innovation entrepreneurship and industrial dynamics in internationalized regional economies revised papers first presented at the 20th uddevalla symposium 1517 june 2017 trollhättan sweden  ed iréne bernhard trollhättan university west  2017 7790 s.
 if you have been admitted to exchange studies outside euees we have listed below what steps you should follow next. you need to read this information carefully so that you know what documentation is required from you and what documents you need to obtain for your studies abroad.
 i have been accepted for studies outide euees  what next?
 you will receive an invitation for an information meeting. at this meeting you will receive information on what will happen next  and we will go into the details on the information listed here below. it is most important to participate as this is also a good opportunity for you to ask questions you may have.
 international office will nominate you to the partner university. once this is done you will receive a confirmation and the partner university will send you information on how you apply etc.
 transcript of records partner universities outside of eu often require a signed transcript of records of your studies here at university west. you can get this from servicecenter.
 english proficiency letter this certificate which states your language level may be required for application to some partner universities. for this reason all accepted exchange students will receive this documentation from us at the international office  but it may be that your university does not require it.pedagogical supportif you have a nais confirmation and receive pedagogical support today at university west you need to contact the partner university you wish to apply for in good time to find out what support you can receive from there.should you need your naisconfirmation translated into english or have other questions please contact the coordinator for support to student with disabilities funka@hv.se
 travelling documents and vaccination
 foreign affairs sweden abroad you will need to inform the swedish embassy in the country where you will be staying that you are there and during what time. read more about the the country you are going to at sweden abroad. your passport must be vaild for the whole stay abroad for example. some countries require your passport to be valid 6 months after you have completed your period.
 apply for visa in good time find out what is required for visa application for the country you are going to by contacting the embassy or consulate  see link above.
 vaccination contact vaccinationscentralen i trollhättan to find out which vaccinations you will need and when you need to take them.
 if applicable csn student finance apply for student finance for the whole academic year even if you are only planning to study one semester abroad. since it takes longer to process the credits from abroad studies it is an advantage to have applied to csn for a full academic year. in this way csn will not followup on the number of credits you have achieved abroad directly once the semester is completed.read more at csn web pages.please note that questions on student finance and eligibility etc. must be adressed directly to csn. international office does not provide support on this.
 you will receive an email from us when you can register for exchange studies under my pages. you will receive an email message when this is possible. without registration you will not be eligible for study finances from csn and you will not be covered by the state insurance for students kammarkollegiet see below  so please do not forget to do this
 kammarkollegiet student ut as a student at university west you are insured by kammarkollegiet state insurance student ut. but in order for this to be valid you must inform international office of your semester dates in grant agreement and register through my pages for exchange studies in ladok. you may need to add an additional home insurance to cover expensive equipment for example. more information on the insurance kammarkollegiet student ut. you will receive the insurance documentation from us through mobilityonline before your departure.
 great bear in mind that you must update your course selection in mobilityonline in the section during the mobility and approve it in order for your departmental coordinator to be notivied and able to process the changes.
 have you been feeling ill or needed to use the studentut insurance by kammarkollegiet? in order to benefit from the insurance you need to fill out a claim form.
 if you for some reason should need to terminate your studies abroad it is very important that you contact international office .sometimes the change of environment can be overwhelming and it is normal to feel unsure of your situation  so dont hesitate to contact us about your thoughts before you decide on anything.
 more information on erasmus studier on our programme web pages pages in swedish.
 2 år 60 he credits
 wifianslutning
 magister i robotik och automation campus 60 hp
 master i robotik och automation campus 120 hp
 magister i software engineering campus 60 hp
 master i ai och automation campus 120 hp
 being a graduate student means that you take responsibility for your studies. for your time as a phd student should pass as smoothly as possible it is important that you sit in and follow the rules that exist for education at university west. the rules should ensure that all students receive the same opportunities and are treated equally.
 the general syllabus
 for each thirdcycle subject area there is a general syllabus. the main content of the thirdcycle programme special entry requirements and other necessary stipulations are all outlined in this syllabus. here you will also find the goals for thirdcycle degrees that have been established by the higher education ordinance.
 the thesis workinprogress
 to guarantee a good start on the dissertation the thirdcycle student should present his or her thesis proposal for discussion at a seminar. the planning seminar is normally held within twelve months of admission to the thirdcycle programme.
 when a thirdcycle student is halfway through his or her studies there is a seminarat which the student presents his or her dissertation work and it is discussed as a whole thus providing advice and support for the second half of the thesis.
 final seminar prior to the midway review
 before the thirdcycle student undergoes a midway review he or she presents the thesis for discussion. at this time the thesis such as the student intends it to be published is discussed. this seminar is meant to provide support for the thirdcycle student in that the first half of the thesis is discussed in detail and the author is provided with constructive criticism before the final draft is printed and the student applies to schedule a midway examination seminar.
 normally there should be plenty of time allowed between the final seminar and the scheduling of the midway review.
 final review
 prior to the public defence the thirdcycle student presents his or her dissertation for a final review. at this time the thesis such as the student intends it to be published is discussed.this seminar is meant to provide support for the thirdcycle student by discussing the thesis in detail. hence time should be allotted for constructive criticism before the final draft of the dissertation is printed and the student applies to schedule a public defence. normally there should be plenty of time allowed between the final review and the scheduling of the defence.
 the general syllabus for each subject area indicates the scope in terms of he credits of the thirdcycle students participation in courses and also specifies which and how many compulsory courses are to be taken during his or her studies. the individual study plan should show both the coursework that the thirdcycle student has done and which compulsory and elective courses he or she plans to take. courses that are part of thirdcycle studies should normally be taken at that level.
 university west offers compulsory courses in the three subject areas of specialisation production engineering informatics with a specialisation in workintegrated learning wil and education studies with a specialisation in workintegrated learning wil. we also offer a number of electives every term. when necessary we offer the possibility of tailoring individual courses to thirdcycle students needs. this is done by agreement between the thirdcycle student and his or her primary supervisor.to the courses.
 for each uw course at the thirdcycle level there is a syllabus in swedish and if the course is given in english there is an english translation of that syllabus. in the syllabus you can find the level of the course the number of he credits it is worth its goals content entry requirements forms of assessment and other necessary information.
 in the case of courses that are created for individual needs students must ensure that the director of studies for thirdcycle courses approves an ad hoc syllabus before beginning the course.
 applicationit is necessary to apply to take a course at least two weeks prior to the date the course starts. this is done by clicking on the link to the course which is found on the page where course offerings are listed. to the courses. to be eligible to take courses at the thirdcycle level you must be admitted to a thirdcycle programme at an institution of higher learning. there may be other entry requirements such as admission to a specific programme. if you have been admitted to a thirdcycle programme at another institution you must enclose a copy of your letter of acceptance in your application.
 after each course a course evaluation is carried out. the purpose of this is to collect students views in order to improve the programme. at our university we use an electronic course evaluation system called evasys. the results of the evaluation are published in a report that is available for thirdcycle students to read within five weeks.
 canvas learning platform
 canvas is the learning platform that is used for communication and interaction between students and teachers. teachers use canvas to outsource lecture materials course information or to discuss the exchange of relevant topics.
 canvas is mandatory
 canvas is mandatory for all courses at university west.
 seminars conferences and other activities
 the doctoral and licentiate degrees programs includes also seminar conferences and other activities. the activities is planned together with the principal supervisor.
 documentation of studies
 ladok is a system for the documentation of credits that is used by all universities in sweden. in addition to students personal data ladok saves information about eligibility admissions registration on courses results credits dropped courses studies abroad and degrees. data in the system form the basis for issuing the degree.
 what happens if there is an error in ladok? a large amount of data is uploaded to ladok manually. it is important that you as a student check to make sure that all the data are correct. if you discover that an error has been made contact servicecenter@hv.se.
 all registered students are insured by kammarkollegiet. this insurance covers accidents and is valid whenever you are on campus unless it is an activity arranged by someone outside the university. you are not covered by this insurance during your free time.
 if you decide to discontinue your studies you should inform the university of this decision by filling out a form for this particular purpose.
 being excused from a course component that is compulsory
 if you are unable to participate in a course component that is compulsory due to religious ethical or other reasons you may request to be excused. to be excused you should fill out a form if your request is denied you can appeal the decision to the higher education appeals board.
 examination  coursework
 the grading system
 the grading system is goalrelated. university west has only two grades the thirdcycle level pass and fail.
 when exams have been marked the course coordinator posts results.
 reporting results
 results are reported to the documentation system ladok.
 if you need to have a certificate of enrolment or an official transcript of your grades contact an administrator for thirdcycle studies.
 any thirdcycle student who has purposefully attempted to deceive the invigilatorsthe lecturer while taking an examination what is called cheating and includes plagiarism unapproved collaboration and the use of unapproved resources or disturbs the class examination can be suspended or given a warning. the disciplinary board makes the decisions with regard to these issues. the board is made up of the vice chancellor a member with legal knowledge and representatives for faculty as well as students.
 similar measures are taken against a student who causes disturbances in the library or harasses an employee or another student at the university. decisions taken by the disciplinary board can be appealed to an administrative court.
 any student who causes a disturbance in class or elsewhere at the university can be temporarily dismissed.
 in the case that a student on the programme is judged to be a threat to others or others property whether it is due to a psychiatric condition serious criminality or abuse of alcohol drugs that student be expelled from the programme. these problems are investigated and the higher education appeals board  hands down a decision. this board serves all swedish institutions of higher learning.
 the right to supervision and other resources
 if a doctoral student is neglecting his or her commitments to the extent that she is not following the individual study plan the vicechancellor will take the decision to suspend that students right to supervision and terminate access to university resources. resources cannot however be terminated as long as the student is employed as a doctoral student. if resources needed for study have been withdrawn the doctoral student can request that the vicechancellor have these resources as well as the right to supervision reinstated.
 a decision to terminate a students access to resources for study can be appealed to the higher education appeals board önh.
 artificial intelligence ethical  societal challenges från lunds universitet
 ai business and the future of work från lunds universitet
 ai course for educators  ai for education
 vahid hosseini about sicomap
 value  virtualization of advanced lab units and exercies
 these areas of expertise are in many ways crucial for the efficient manufacture of many businesses and skills supply with current knowledge and practices at the international level is essential to meet global competition. this project aims to meet the needs available in the industry. in this way we can contribute to effective learning methods based on modern it in addition to meet the needs of industry.
 vanini got the chance to do an internship in paris
 vanini bilemdgian is studying the international programme in politics and economics ippe at university west and did her internship at an embassy in paris.
 one of the many reasons vanini chose to study this program was because ippe has one semester where you get the chance to do an internship or study abroad as long as its related to politics or economics. vanini got to do an internship at an embassy in paris which made her love the field that she is studying even more.
 for vanini one of the many advantages of ippe is that its an international program where you will meet people from all around the world.
 i am a very sociable person and i like having international contacts. in this program you will meet people from all around the world. once you start socializing you will get to know more about cultures mentalities living conditions and education levels in other countries she says.
 vanini also finds learning from other students experiences very helpful. in some of the courses where they have seminars or group work the students share their own experiences and stories from their hometowns. by doing so the students expand their understanding of the way countries deal with political and economic issues.
 she also says that the program is based on work integrated learning allowing students to learn and absorb knowledge more practically. the professors give examples of world problems economic issues and make the students think outside the box. the students also get to look at many perspectives and listen to and learn about other peoples opinions.
 basically this program prepares you for your future career it provides you with everything necessary that you will be facing in the future vanini says.
 vanini explains that this program has changed her as a person in how she sees things and how she speaks thinks acts and listens. most importantly she believes it has taught her how to integrate with people of all ages with different ethnicities and mindsets.
 when she is asked what she will be doing in five years from now vanini says that she will either be working in foreign affairs or the united nations.
 the program has given me the confidence i need to fearlessly continue my journey and work in organizations that i have always dreamed of she concludes.
 thomas pederson professor i informatik
 psychologists involvement in and experiences of treating patients with stressrelated exhaustion in primary care.
 dare to ask  a model for teaching nursing students about identifying and responding to violence against women and domestic violence
 anxiety and depression in adults with congenital heart disease
 experiences of a novel structured foot examination form for patients with diabetes from the perspective of health care professionals  qualitative study
 developing a womancentered inclusive definition of positive childbirth experiences  a discussion paper
 i dread the heart surgery but it keeps my child alive  experiences of parents of children with right ventricular outflow tract anomalies during the assessment for cardiac reoperation
 an intersectional analysis of health inequalities and vulnerabilities during the covid19 pandemic
 patientreported outcomes in the aging population of adults with congenital heart disease  results from approachis
 philip moons koen luyckx corina thomet werner budts junko enomoto maayke a. sluman hsiao ling yang jamie l. jackson paul khairy stephen c. cook shanthi chidambarathanu luis alday erwin oechslin katrine eriksen mikael dellborg malin berghammer bengt johansson andrew s. mackie samuel menahem maryanne caruana gruschen veldtman alexandra soufi susan m. fernandes kamila white edward callus shelby kutty adrienne h. kovacs
 investigating the learning environment for sustainable lifelong learning in small and medium enterprises
 a hybrid type i multicenter randomized controlled trial to study the implementation of a method for sustained cord circulation and ventilation the savemethod of late preterm and term neonates  a study protocol
 reclaiming sexual health  unscripted sexual practices of men having sex with men after prostate cancer treatment as ways to comfort and wellbeing in everyday life
 living a frozen life  a qualitative study on asylum seekers experiences and care practices at accommodation centers in sweden
 reorienting healthcare for healthy living communities  a qualitative exploration of nursing students utilising the salutogenic theory for community health practice
 scandinavian online cancer information as expressions of governmentality
 oral care cards as a support in daily oral care of frail older adults  experiences and perceptions of professionals in nursing and dental care  a qualitative study
 ideas of how peer support workers facilitate interprofessional learning in mental health care teamwork  conceptual paper
 peer support workers role and expertise and interprofessional learning in mental health care  a scoping review
 managing conflict situations nursing students encounter during their clinical practice narrated and performed through forum play
 older patients recovery following intensive care  a followup study with the rain questionnaire
 phenotypes of adults with congenital heart disease around the globe  a cluster analysis.
 edward callus silvana pagliuca sara boveri federico ambrogi koen luyckx adrienne h kovacs silke apers werner budts junko enomoto maayke a sluman joukou wang jamie l jackson paul khairy stephen c cook shanthi chidambarathanu luis alday katrine eriksen mikael dellborg malin berghammer bengt johansson andrew s mackie samuel menahem maryanne caruana gruschen veldtman alexandra soufi susan m fernandes kamila white shelby kutty philip moons
 a scoping review of delphi studies concerning social participation of refugees in health services
 maternal depression symptoms during the first 21 months after giving birth
 a scoping review of pain management education programs pmeps  do they prepare nurses to deal with patients postoperative pain?
 manaporn chatchumni henrik eriksson monir mazaheri
 emergency medical response in mass casualty tunnel incidents  with emphasis on prehospital care
 processoriented group supervision  how does it support newly graduated nurses learning?
 from unwelcome to supportive  patients conceptions of being prescribed a glucoselowering drug at type 2 diabetes diagnosis  a phenomenographic study
 child healthcare nurses experience of communication with 4yearold children during their visit to the child health care center
 neonatal healthcare professionals experiences of intact cord resuscitation in the mothers bed  an interview study
 overcrowded house exploring asylum seekers experiences of the covid19 pandemic while living at accommodation centers in sweden
 experiences of being treated with autologous haematopoietic stem cell transplantation for aggressive multiple sclerosis  a qualitative interview study
 andreas tolf helena gauffin joachim burman annemarie landtblom gullvi flensner
 exploring sociotechnical challenges in patient selfmonitoring  a qualitative case study
 distant suffering  a concept analysis.
 hospital shoes and their owners  expressed team identity among healthcare staff by signs of their footwear
 encircling discourses  a guide to critical discourse analysis in caring science
 nurses discursive construction of older adult immigrant patients in hospitals
 a mapping review of netnography in nursing
 encountering suffering in digital care  a qualitative study of providers experiences in telemental health care
 building common knowledge when responding to major road tunnel incidents  an interorganisational focus group study
 perceptions and implementation of a child perspective among professionals working with vulnerable children who have experienced war and crises
 heart failure and patientreported outcomes in adults with congenital heart disease from 15 countries.
 chunwei lu joukou wang hsiaoling yang adrienne h kovacs koen luyckx francisco javier rupertirepilado alexander van de bruaene junko enomoto maayke a. sluman jamie l. jackson paul khairy stephen c. cook shanthi chidambarathanu luis alday erwin oechslin katrine eriksen mikael dellborg malin berghammer bengt johansson andrew s. mackie samuel menahem maryanne caruana gruschen veldtman alexandra soufi susan m. fernandes kamila white edward callus shelby kutty silke apers philip moons
 core components of an effective pain management education programme for surgical nurses  a delphi study
 job satisfaction in midwives and its association with organisational and psychosocial factors at work  a nationwide crosssectional study
 atrial arrhythmias and patientreported outcomes in adults with congenital heart disease  an international study
 benjamin casteigt michelle samuel laurence laplante azadeh shohoudi silke apers adrienne h. kovacs koen luyckx corina thomet werner budts junko enomoto maayke a. sluman chunwei lu jamie l. jackson stephen c. cook shanthi chidambarathanu luis alday katrine eriksen mikael dellborg malin berghammer bengt johansson andrew s. mackie samuel menahem maryanne caruana gruschen veldtman alexandra soufi susan m. fernandes kamila white edward callus shelby kutty judith brouillette philip moons paul khairy
 learning in the third rooma way to develop praxis by embracing differences between theoretical and practical knowledge
 salutogenesis for thriving societies
 escorting students into responsibility and autonomy esra  a model for supervising degree projects
 from open to locked doors  from dependent to independent  patient narratives of participation in their rehabilitation processes
 longterm healthrelated quality of life and burden of disease after intensive care  development of a patientreported outcome measure.
 nurses experiences of serving as a communication guide and supporting the implementation of a communication intervention in the intensive care unit
 development of an international standard set of clinical and patientreported outcomes for children and adults with congenital heart disease  a report from the international consortium for health outcomes measurement congenital heart disease working group.
 an introduction to the health promotion perspective in the health care services
 coordination of paediatric oncology care  an explorative swedish case study
 patientreported outcomes in adults with congenital heart disease following hospitalization from approachis.
 philip moons koen luyckx corina thomet werner budts junko enomoto maayke a sluman joukou wang jamie l jackson paul khairy stephen c cook shanthi chidambarathanu luis alday erwin oechslin katrine eriksen mikael dellborg malin berghammer bengt johansson andrew s mackie samuel menahem maryanne caruana gruschen veldtman alexandra soufi susan m fernandes kamila white edward callus shelby kutty silke apers adrienne h kovacs
 a review of usability methods used in the evaluation of mobile health applications for diabetes.
 enablers and barriers for being physically active  experiences from adults with congenital heart disease
 from fear to fight  patients experiences of early mobilization in intensive care. a qualitative interview study
 physical functioning mental health and quality of life in different congenital heart defects  comparative analysis in 3538 patients from 15 countries
 philip moons koen luyckx corina thomet werner budts junko enomoto maayke a sluman chunwei lu jamie l jackson paul khairy stephen c cook shanthi chidambarathanu luis alday katrine eriksen mikael dellborg malin berghammer bengt johansson andrew s mackie samuel menahem maryanne caruana gruschen veldtman alexandra soufi susan m fernandes kamila s white edward callus shelby kutty fouke ombelet silke apers adrienne h kovacs
 impact of sense of coherence on oral health behaviour and perceived stress among a rural population in southindia  an exploratory study
 cyber omvårdnad teori och metodutvecklingcybernursing the project internet is now an integral part of everyday living not least of which among those who seek and offer support in cyberspace. as such cyber nursing has become an important activity to monitor. henrik eriksson högskolan väst martin salzmannerikson högskolan i gävle
 varga  adaptive control of varying joint gap in lbww
 the project aims at increase the flexibility for low series production facilitate introduction of new products or new materials in robotized laser beam welding as well as securing a high and consistent weld quality.
 finding and tracking a butt joint with zero gap as well as joints with varying gap demands extensive testing prior to production welding. the weld quality may be affected by the joint demanding difficulttoperform inspections to find for instance very narrow lack of fusion.
 to achieve this an inprocess solution will be developed in order to secure uniform weld joint geometry and weld properties despite the presence of joint gap variations and uncertainties in joint position. costs for setup of the laser cell preand postweld work will be reduced and the tolerance in joint preparation and fixturing will be increased.
 the inprocess system will be based on a nonintrusive vision sensors system together with special illumination integrated in the laser beam welding tool combined with appropriate inprocess control of the fillerwire feedrate welding parameters and robot path corrections.
 photo from the waterfalls in trollhattan.
 desrist 2024 will be located at university west in trollhättan sweden. trollhattan is translated as trolls bonnet and the idea behind the name goes back to an anecdote regarding the city the water that splashes from a large rock at the bottom of the waterfall before the hydro dam in trollhattan was built was imagined looking like a trolls hat.
 the location is a good choice for arranging international conferences because it has good connection points for transportation to and from the venueairport by airport shuffle train car multiple hotels for accommodation see worthy places e.g. the dam innovatum gkn and it is located close to gothenburg 35 minutes by train.
 input och output
 why did you apply to us at university west and why ippe?
 i was looking for an interdisciplinary programme which combines studies in politics and economics. i enjoyed learning some basic contents in these subjects in school already and was and am curious about learning more about it. furthermore i knew i wanted to study abroad to gather new perspectives and to get to know another country closely. when i found university wests ippe programme it sounded just perfect.
 foremost i liked that the programme that according to the syllabus had a lot of international aspects. previous experience showed me that other universities most international studies e.g. international business administration include the international aspects only in the last year of the programme. this is different here. the ippe programme includes international coursescontents from day 1 on. for example i enjoyed very much the international politics and globalization course in the first semester.
 another aspect i liked from the beginning was that university west is a relatively small university. the familiar atmosphere and the clean and modern buildings create a great place to study.
 is it what you thought it should be and how was that or is it different?
 yes i feel like i chose the best opportunity i could have chosen. at the end of my decision process some other international schools competed. however university west matched the most with my wishes for my studies. i was positively surprised by how friendly the staff and lecturers are. lecturers listen to your questions ideas and try to provide assistance to support you. i know from experience this cannot be taken for granted.
 what is the most exciting thing you have done during the studies?
 since i am in my first year i have not had any major projects or internships yet. however i really enjoyed the international politics and globalization course in the first semester. in this course you learn about international relations and how to look at international events through different lenses and thus interpret these incidents differently. this course broadened my mind very much.
 i am really looking forward to doing an exchange semester abroad. here we are given the opportunity to choose between doing an internship or studying at another university.
 i really like the familiar atmosphere at the university. the library is a great place to study and one feels welcome and comfortable within the buildings and uniareas. i experienced at other universities that during examination periods it is always a struggle to find a study space in the library or elsewhere in the university. i love that this fight does not have to be fought here. there is always a space to study available at the library and if it is not there are several other nice and cosy study areas everywhere in the buildings and for group meetings rooms can be easily booked.
 the culture within the programme is international since students from all over the world take this englishtaught programme. when we look at the language aspect everybody from students and lecturers to servicecentre and library staff speaks english. anyway some knowledge in the swedish language and culture is beneficial to be able to read all signs to have access to all information provided and to be able to communicate better with other swedish students. to gain basic knowledge in the swedish language and culture the university provides a course at the basic level.
 due to the covid19 pandemic student life is currently quite restricted. in the summer the restrictions were not the same as now. right at the start of the autumn semester the inslussningen is a good place to get to know people. this is a 2weekperiod where several activities are planned by the student union. after that one can join the student union and become an active member of it. they organize sittnings parties and pubs in the student union building and other events during the year. overall it is a good place to make friends.
 within the student union the international students committee isc is currently brought back to life by other students and me. i hope we can establish a helpful pillar to make international students lives at university west easier and even more fun. we try to provide helpful advice concerning the everyday lives of international students as well as connecting them with other international and swedish students through activities and events.
 by train it takes approximately 30 minutes to travel to gothenburg which is a great place to do some sightseeing shopping to spend a nice evening or many more.
 trollhättan is surrounded by beautiful nature. doing outside sports activity together with some friends is a good way to spend sunny days as well.
 aim and goal
 expected contributions and effects
 study plan and design
 project teams connected to vip4wil
 freiia electrical drive line total defense in sweden led by dr. wayne stephen coetzeesustainable forest management led by dr. tuba inal  dr. hakan inaltrollhättans restart strategy led by prof. malin sundström
 you can send in an application via the form here no later than 3152024.
 motivation for sdgs no 4 and no 9
 cooperative education coop samt
 university west offered distance courses which suited my interest
 why did you apply to the master in robotics and automation?
 one or twoyear study period choice also looked good for me
 the most exciting experience was onsite in the production technology centre. it is always fascinating when you see how it works practically with the work you have done.
 why did you choose to apply for a distance learning programme and how has worked to study at a distance?
 i prefer studying by myself but i need my studies to be evaluated and recognized at the same time.
 this is not the first experience of distance studying for me so it works just great. i sometimes wonder actually why distance learning is still not the main and prevailing form of education. considering available technologies it definitely should be like this.
 this is what we mean by being a vibrant and accessible campus.
 vibrant and accessible campus  one of the impact targets in the campus development
 our campus is a hive of activity almost all day seven days a week. it is a safedynamic and inspiring place where something is always happening. students employees collaborative partners and other visitors enjoy spending time here for the energy inspiration and knowledge it provides. it is an inclusive accessible campus that renders our activities and those of our partners visible and where everyone feels welcome no matter who you are.
 vicechancellor comments the current situation
 many students contact the vicechancellor martin hellström in the current pandemic situation. the vicechancellor has a great understanding of students concerns and thoughts and responds and explains the current situation below.
 some students express that they are dissatisfied with the fact that education and examination are arranged on the universitys premises on site while others are disappointed that education and examination take place digitally and not on site.
 university west is a state authority led by a vicechancellor appointed by the government the prime minister. the university and the vicechancellor therefore must follow the restrictions and recommendations stipulated by the state and state authorities.
 the prime minister held a press conference on 10 january 2022 where she explicitly stated that all adult education and higher education must be arranged on site if stated in the course syllabi both in terms of teaching and examination. the minister of education held a press conference the next day 11 january 2022 where she repeated this and added that the higher education institutions should investigate whether it is possible to avoid large lectures this does not apply to seminar exercises laboratory work or examination.
 that information is provided on the governments website and on the public health agencys website. it is unfortunate but also understandable that the media does not report the information in its entirety. if you only look at an abbreviated media report the impression can therefore arise that there is room for interpretation where there is really no room for interpretation. the situation is handled in a similar way at all state universities in the country ie. in accordance with the instructions of the government and the ministry of education.
 due to the current information as well as the current regulations and recommendations university west has taken measures to handle the situation in accordance with these. information about this has been sent out to all students and staff. education and examination must therefore as far as possible be arranged on site however there may be deviations from the form of teaching compared with what is stated in the course syllabus. this is considered legally as a deviation from the syllabus which requires both a decision from me as the vicechancellor to make it possible and a decision from the relevant head of department head of an institution after consultation with teachers. i have made such a decision and it means that some teaching elements can be carried out on site others in hybrid mode some at a distance. this may also apply to examinations in certain cases. the purpose of this is to reduce the number of people on campus while at the same time giving students the opportunity to be on campus as much as possible. decisive for the deviations is an assessment based on pedagogical and pandemicrelated aspects.
 the management at university west has also conveyed that the university is generous in arranging reexaminations so that students do not feel pressured to come to an examination despite symptoms of illness.
 when it comes to the situation in classrooms during teaching and examination teachers guards and students have a responsibility to ensure that queues and crowding are avoided. it is possible to use a face mask both on the premises and in local traffic. it is important to get vaccinated. stay home when you are sick. stay up to date on the situation it can change if the government and the public health agency change their assessments and recommendations.
 mats jägstam is vicechancellor of university west
 since august 1 2023 mats jägstam is vicechancellor of university west. he comes most recently from a role as ceo at science park skövde where he has been since 2020.
 mats jägstam has a long background in both academia and business with a strong focus on collaboration which is something he also has a great interest in and which has also been an important parameter in the universitys recruitment process and requirements profile.
 the universitys strong profile in workintegrated learning and collaboration is something that i am really passionate about. i have always believed that knowledge is created in all different parts of society. it is more important than ever that universities are truly integrated into society  that we create knowledge together. of course i hope and believe i can contribute with my experiences in the field says mats jägstam.
 mats jägstam has a doctorate in production technology. he has had several leading positions in both academia and business. previous jobs include vicechancellor at university of skövde with special responsibility for internationalization and cooperation provicechancellor and acting vicechancellor at jönköping university ceo at university of technology in jönköping ab and ceo at the spinoff company evoma ab.
 facts about mats jägstam  a selection
 deputy vicechancellor for industry cooperation and internationalisation university of skövde 2018  2020
 acting vicechancellor jönköping university 2017
 provice chancellor jönköping university 2016  2018
 ceo and academic leader jönköping university of technology ab 2012  2016
 deputy vice chancellor university of skövde 2007  2012
 senior lecturer university of skövde 2005  2012
 phd in production engineering on efficient use and integration of discrete event simulation in industry demontfort university leicester uk 2004
 board assignments in several universities of applied sciences at jönköping university science park jönköping ab drivhuset skaraborg connect väst skaraborg invest gjuteriföreningen among many others.
 information about the vicechancellor of university west.
 vicechancellor as of 1 august 2023 is mats jägstam.presentation of mats jägstam
 the vicechancellor is appointed by decision of the government for a maximum of six years following a proposal by the board of the university. the employment may be renewed but not more than twice in each of a maximum of three years.
 the vicechancellors responsibility
 the vicechancellors responsibility is directly under the board to manage the activities at the university and to be part of the universitys board. the vicechancellor is also chairman of the universitys disciplinary board and the universitys staff responsibility committee.
 as head of the university authority the vicechancellor must ensure that the business is conducted in a constitutional and efficient manner. the vicechancellor may delegate his or her duties unless otherwise specified but decide in the following matters
 issues that do not arrive on the universitys board.
 issues where it is specifically stated in the statute that the vicechancellor decides.
 issues where the universitys board of directors has assigned the vicechancellor to decide such as the determination of the universitys educational offerings and local degree program
 the vicechancellor has a deputy who serves in the vicechancellors place when he is not in office. the deputy also replaces the vicechancellor to the extent decided by the vicechancellor. at university west the vicechancellors deputy is named pro vicechancellor. the pro vicechancellor is appointed by the university board.
 pro vicechancellor at university west is lena sjöberg.
 management support boardcommittee support law public procurement archives registrar.
 head of vicechancellors office
 staff vice chancellors office
 administrative officer                        registrator
 working with videobased material increases learning
 in an exciting review article michael notel et al show that the use of different media forms triggers the human ability to recreate what one experiences via another channel. for example you paint pictures of what we hear when you listen to a podcast and in the same way we can hear the story we read. if a video is used several senses are stimulated which gives a positive reinforcement of the learning not least when the videobased material is offered as part of the asynchronous learning where the student can control what and when the studies take place and at what pace.
 as the video material is available asynchronously it also gives the teacher the opportunity to process the material in a way that is not possible if the recording takes place at a synchronous meeting which is important if you want to go further with your videobased learning objects. above all this is about removing irrelevant information and at the same time highlighting what is important.
 the overview study video improves learning in higher education shows that there is a clear connection between higher study results and the use of videobased edited asynchronous material in teaching. however the study clearly shows that the very best effect is achieved when combining online material with different forms of synchronous meetings with the students. noetel m. et al. 2021
 in other words the breadth of different forms of teaching and the way we distribute them are the key to success.
 further reading in the article which can be found in the library.
 welcome to the vilärconference 910 december
 the focus of the conference is workintegrated learning and challenges associated with educational design and practices.
 we have previous announced vilär as a hybrid version but due to current circumstances the conference will only be given as an online event.
 the conference will take place in zoom. there will be a main room where we start and end the conference in between we will enjoy the keynotes sessions and entertainment.
 workintegrated learning is a generic term for different educational models that bases on collaboration and integration between higher education and working life. in this field of knowledge we find the challenges that are all a part of workbased education. cooperative education coop mentorship programs clinical rotations work placements field studies and other forms of collaboration between higher education and work life.
 the conference is an annual reoccurring venue for scientists teachers phd students curricula design developers and decisionmakers. it targets everyone that is interested in learning and especially work integrated learning.
 in additions to this there is opportunity to expand the social network and speak with both national and international scientists within the fields of your expertise.
 current information
 you will find the session matrix and the absract book
 information about registration and conference fee
 information about paper formats criteria etc.
 conference information
 programme session matrix abstract book
 extented time for submission of abstract til the 8th of november
 projektpartner hydro extruded solutions och automotive components floby.
 for distance studies we offer access to windows computers in our virtual computer room. read more about how to connect below.
 connect to a computer in the virtual computer room
 for windows
 first download the client and install it on your computer. pick the version that suits your computer usually 64bit.download the remote desktop client
 follow the guide and then start the application  remote desktop.
 click on the button subscribe with url and paste the following adress in the text field
 double click the computer hvdesktop under the headline hvdesktop and log on with your username followed by @student.hv.se e. g. buba0001@student.hv.se and your ordinary password. in this system we also use multifactor authentication mfa when logging in. you therefore need to activate mfa. read about mfa and how to activate it here
 when the installation is complete launch the app.
 once you have started click on workspaces then paste the following link in the field
 then doubleclick on the machine hvdesktop under the heading hvdesktop and log in with your  username followed by @student.hv.se eg buba0001@student.hv.se and password.
 in this system we also use multifactor authentication mfa when logging in. you therefore need to activate mfa. read about mfa and how to activate it here
 the files you create on the remote computer can be saved to your home directory h as usual. then if you want to download the files to your own computer you can do so via the system my files. read about my files here
 virtual factory and robot cell simulation
 virtual factory and robot cell simulation 25 hp
 we already see how digitalization has challenged and transformed several different areas of our everyday life as well as our professional life. the objective of the course is to increase the students knowledge concerning the virtual factory and robotic simulation level to create the digital twin of the production and the process. these techniques enable capabilities of industry 4.0 technologies. in the course students will gain theoretical knowledge on virtual factory and robotics simulation technologies as well as practical handling of industrial robots. robotic applications in focus are arc welding robotized controlled milling and grading.
 virtual factory and digital twin including factory scanning
 understanding and knowledge to use robot simulation tools to make decisions regarding factory solutions
 simulation and programming of industrial robots using commercial robotic simulation tools
 this course focus on different aspects of simulation of production and production systems. the main focus will be on discrete simulation of material flow. this is of importance when designing factory layouts and setting up production facilities.
 loa202logistics and
 gpp100introduction to programming with python and iot or the equivalent.
 virtual servers and storage systems parttime campus vsl402
 the course is based on lectures on virtualization and storage systems architecture and the methods and techniques for planning handling and maintenance.
 each student group contstructs its own platform for virtualization with vsphere server administration esxi servers as hypervisors and related storage systems with san technology. this platform is then used as a an environment for virtual servers virtual private network switched and iscsibased storage. the environment is then raised to production quality with technologies for resource allocation high availability fault tolerance and security. the course also deals with methods for creating and managing virtual machines by including templates scripts monitoring.
 completed course requirements of 60 credits in computer engineering including the courses gna100 fundamentals of network and internet technology 7.5 he credits ogl200 operating systems with gnulinux 7.5 he credits and dao100 computer architecture and operating system 4.5 he credits or pda115 personal computer technology and maintenance 7.5 he credits or similar courses.
 visa insurance and health care
 this section contains information about entry visas residence permits and insurance.
 residence permit and visa
 students from certain countries outside of the eueea who plan to study in sweden for a period shorter than three months need an entry visa.
 more information about who needs an entry visa and the application procedure for entry visas can be obtained either from the nearest swedish embassy or consulate or at the swedish migration agency website.
 students from countries outside of the eueea who plan to study in sweden for a period longer than three months must have a residence permit.
 it is essential that you apply for a residence permit as soon as you have received your letter of admission. to be sure of obtaining your permit in time you should present your application and if applicable pay your tuition fee as soon as possible.
 the fastest way to get a visaresidence permit is to apply online at the swedish migration agency website. when your application is registered and you have received a control number visit the nearest swedish embassyconsulate in order to be photographed and take fingerprints for the residence permit card.
 note dont wait for the decision about your residence permit before visiting the nearest swedish embassyconsulate because it will delay the process.
 of course its important that you are insured while studying with us. here you can read what will be covered.
 insurance for exchange students and feepaying students
 insurance during school hours
 all students at university west are insured by the state insurance company kammarkollegiet during school hours travels to and from the university and during any activities performed by the university. this insurance covers emergency health care in case of an accident. this insurance does not cover emergency health care due to accidents during students spare time nor does it cover regular health or dental care.
 insurance outside school hours
 incoming exchange and feepaying degree students registered at the university are covered by special insurances student in and fas that are valid during study time and free time throughout the duration of studies as well as two weeks prior to the start of studies and two weeks after the end of studies. more detailed information about the conditions as well as forms can be found at the kammarkollegiet website.
 this insurance offers medical and dental coverage home transport third party liability and legal protection. you will be charged a higher fee to see a doctor but you can claim the cost from the insurance company by submitting a claim form signed by the international office.
 please note that the insurance provided by the university does not cover loss of property. you have to buy your own insurance for this.
 insurance for degree students from eueea countries
 all students at university west are insured by the state insurance company kammarkollegiet during school hours. travels to and from the university and during any activities performed by the university. this insurance covers emergency health care in case of an accident. this insurance does not cover emergency health care due to accidents during students spare time nor does it cover regular health or dental care.
 european degree students from countries in the eueea are responsible for their own insurance outside school hours. if you have health insurance in another eueea country you will pay the same fee for a visit to a doctor or a nurse as swedish citizens. the condition is that you are able to show a european health insurance card which you get from your local health authority free of charge in your country of residence. for more information visit the european commission website.
 how to see medical care
 if it is an emergency call 112.if it is not an emergency you have to call or visit a health care center vårdcentral or call 1177.
 health care advice via 1177
 if you need to talk to a nurse you can call 1177 or 46 771 11 77 00 for healthcare advice at any time of day or night.
 you can also check the website 1177.se where you can find multiple articles about illness symptoms advice etc and also contact information to all clinics in sweden.
 health care center vårdcentral
 at a health care center you can be examined and receive treatment for the majority of illnesses and conditions. you can contact them via phone to seek advice or book an appointment. they also offer dropin hours sometimes.
 you should choose the health care center closest to your home. for example students living at lantmannavägen and lasarettsvägen can contact lextorp vårdcentral students living at järnvägsgatan can contact maria alberts vårdcentral their websites are only in swedish but the phone number is in english too.
 when the vårdcentral is closed you can contact an outofhours clinic jourcentral. here are the contact information for the jourcentral in trollhättan  in swedish only.
 please note that your insurance from the university covers emergency dental care only.
 if you need dental care you can contact a clinic through the public dental service folktandvården. you can find more information here.
 costs and documentation
 for more information about costs and documentation please check our faq web page section health and insurance issues.
 no if you are a citizen of schengen eu usa canada australia new zeland or japan you do not need a visa.
 yes if you are a citizen of e.g. russia china india or one of the other countries listed see link below you still need to apply for a visa to sweden.
 a visa is a preliminary permit which is required to enter and remain in sweden and the other schengen countries for a short period of time e.g. to attend a conference.the visa should be complete and be entered in the passport before entry into the schengen area.
 citizens from the majority of countries outside the eu require a visa to visit sweden. this is a decision reached by sweden together with the other eu countries.you can find a list of countries whose nationals require a visa to visit sweden at
 visitors who arrive from countries that are not on the list can enter sweden and the other schengen countries and remain there without a visa for three months.
 normally a decision for a visa is made within two weeks although processing times at the missions abroad vary. to be certain that you will receive your visa in time you should submit your application at least two months before you are due to travel to sweden.
 this is required to be granted a visa
 a passport valid for at least three months after the final date stated in the visa.
 money for your keep and for the journey home 40 approximately sek 370 for each day spent in sweden.
 individual medical travel insurance which covers any costs that could arise in conjunction with emergency medical assistance emergency hospital care or transport to your home country for medical reasons. the insurance should cover costs of at least 30000 and be valid in all the schengen countries.
 more information can be found at the swedish migration board or printed out from this fact sheet.
 here you will find an overall description of the university west  wide dimensions and the goals and strategies that have been decided  our common goals and strategy map.
 our way forward
 our way forwardvår väg framåt  our strategic document se below in swedish  should act as a signpost and something to stick to together  in many ways the university west backbone. this includes among other things vision foundation of values and core values.
 for university west joint journey there are also a number of goals and strategies that show what the university wants and the way to get there. these are tied together by a number of universitywide dimensions. our way forward should be read as a map and be the universitys compass and help to get a common picture of who the university is wants to be and what the way there should be.
 the longterm aspiration is that through our actions we contribute to a more sustainable world.
 our vision describes our universitys overarching mission which we constantly strive to uphold. it expresses our role and the benefits to the societyatlarge that we can offer. it is a compass in our daily work as well as for the longterm direction of our journey.
 our vision places demands upon us. being an active member of the society means that we see a need take a stand take the initiative and propel developments forward. we act and work together with the world around us which means we are always seeking opportunities for collaboration outside of our academic sphere.
 and making knowledge accessible to more people means that we take our role as an active player within society seriously and are constantly striving to broaden our recruitment base and reach more people. this imposes educational and communicative demands upon us to be accessible open and inclusive. our longterm efforts shall result in us contributing towards a more sustainable world through our actions.
 dimensions that should pervade all operations
 ethical  foundation
 how we are and do things
 our view on equal terms and conditions
 about wil and what it means to us
 about how and why we collaborate
 universitywide impact goals and strategies
 in order for us to reach these goals and fulfill our mission with good effects for students collaborative actors and society at large we need to focus on a number of areas. for each goal there are therefore some designated strategies that lay the foundation for us to successfully achieve our vision. both goals and strategies are followed up annually.
 we are brave and help each other to grow
 we improve the world every day
 we are a regional driving force a national leader and internationally recognised
 we are a leading wil university for lifelong learning and sustainable societal development
 two complete academic environments
 as of january 1 2023 the environments are formally in place and will be built over the next 10 years based on the strategic plans that have been designed.
 read more about learning and knowledge related to work and and working life and the goals and strategies that are formulated for this area.
 visit by ipb
 visit from portugal strengthened collaboration
 five deans from our strategic partner in portugal institute polytechnic of braganca ipb recently visited university west. the visit was conducted as a part of the development of the stars european university alliance but also not least our joint bilateral collaborations between ipb and university west.
 the visiting deans were welcomed by acting vicechancellor jan theliander and representatives from our departments. this was followed by discussions on possibilities in particular a new form of short mobility called blended intensive programs bips within erasmus integrated into our study programs.
 visits around campus
 the visitors from ipb were showed our technical and pedagogical facilities on campus like open lab active learning classrooms alc and our hybrid classrooms to inspire and see those possibilities the first day.
 the second day started with a very interesting and informative visit to klc clinical learning center where methodology and techniques used for the training of nurses were presented.
 the visit was hosted by senior advisor for internationalisation gunnar peterson and staff from all departments at university west participated. as a follow up to the visit a smaller group of professors in engineering science from ipb will come to ptc within a month and a visit to ipb by vicedean william jobe from the school of business economics and it is also being planned. the onsite visits will be combined with a digital followup meeting to set up future joint activities.
 about stars
 university west is a part of the stars european university alliance. the general objective of stars is to build an alliance of nine regionally established universities and together become a futureoriented european university that will aim to achieve several goals.
 the partner universities are linked in their desire to have a continued positive impact on the regional and local communities where they are situated while at the same time building a strong transnational collaboration.
 an application to become a european university has been submitted. a decision on whether the application has been approved by the european union is expected by june 30.
 university west in trollhättan is a university which offers education collaborating with worklife in an attractive and modern study environment. we focus on the student and learning. work integrated learning wil as perspective and method permeates the work at the university and is also our profile.
 university wests campus is located in the centre of trollhättan just a few minutes walk from the towns bus and train station.
 arrival by carthe university is located in the center of trollhättan next to drottningtorget and on the opposite side of the town hall and a large water tower that is easy to see. you turn off from highway 45 at the roundabout where signs show towards the center. school parking accessed from the city hall roundabout right into gustava melin street and is signposted.
 arrival by train or bustrains and buses run regularly to trollhättan from gothenburg. the trip to the town is approximately 35 minutes by train. buses complete the trip in approximately 90 minutes. the central bus station in gothenburg nils ericson terminal is located next to the train station central station. gothenburg also has intercity rail links with stockholm copenhagen and oslo.
 arrival by airlandvetter airportthe airport has daily flights to and from most major european cities. there is a convenient airport bus service that connects landvetter to the central station in gothenburg. buses run 24 times an hour.
 below you will find a map of the campus with explanations.
 a  student unionb  student pentry bottenhavet drivhusetc  central caféd  gregarts student book store entré ail student healthe  main entrance restaurant västan libraryf  stråket entrance floor albertsalen
 g  servicecenter study and career councelling study administration admission degree certification and student administration office clinical learning centre.
 h  study area halland and hälsingland with student kitchenettes computer rooms lockers and group study. studielandskap härjedalen with computer room lockers and quiet study room. creative centre.
 i j  study area ishavet and vita havet with student kitchenettes computer rooms lockers and group study. study area medelhavet with computer room lockers and quiet study room.
 find your facilitiesthe letter illustrates in which building you find the facility and the first number shows on what floor. example f211  you find f211 in the fhouse on the 2nd floor.
 in need of more information?
 dont hesitate to contact us olkc2022@hv.se
 friction stir welding and processing ultrasonic welding friction stir additive manufacturing light metals dissimilar welding grain refinement aluminium and magnesium alloys.
 here you will find information about how to become vmware it academy.
 audience schools who want to become vmware it academies vita
 what you get
 lab manual for the students powerpoints for the instructor no handouts allowed license keys for almost every vmware software esxi vcenter workstation ... attendance install configure  manage is worth 32000kr according to cornerstone.se certificate is now included in voucher not viewableprintable. last year students and instructors got a 70 discount on the certification fee 2000kr 4 month of support after your ttt instructor training
 what you dont get
 no online curriculatextbook. you are not allowed to give the students the powerpoints. online ebook availible through gilmoreglobal at a cost of 25.45 per copy no chapter tests no final exam and no skills exam. there are no academy certificates at all. only the commercial certificate exists in the vmware world. no letters to give to the students but there will be an electronic badge in the future you cant give the students any certificate like vcpdcv. letters of attendance is nowadays encrypted in the vouchercode. letters of attendance is a prerequisite for taking the vcpdcv commercial certification exam you may not offer or require more than a maximum of 12 hours combined lecture and lab time per week.
 your shopping list
 what you need at your place per group
 two permanently on pcs with quaddual core vtsupport 168 gb ram and 300120gb disk for esxi. they both need an extra 1gbits hardware compliant network card nic
 one permanently on pc with 42 gb ram and 500220gb disk for storage. can be exchanged with iscsitarget software on a windows machine.
 twoone switches with 1000100mbits ports with vlan capability
 one pc maybe a laptop for managing the system. if you skip this pc you need to run windows on the storagemachine
 some usb memory sticks as a boot device for the storagemachine installation media  biosupgrades etc. some install usbs could be exchanged with cddvds
 numbers in paranthesis are minimal system requirements and are not recommended
 test your pcs cpu for vmotion evc and 64bit vmware support with the bootcdcpu identification utility cpuid.iso or try a test installation of the operating systemesxi vmwarevmvisorinstaller6.0.0.update013029758.x86_64.iso
 these are the costs involved when you become a vmware it academy
 license server annual fee vmap subscription renewal  1 year  departmental  credit card 217493 kr payed to kivuto
 18000 kr for two same price for one instructor training tttcourse 1 full week in trollhättan
 annual feesupport contract with catc scandinavia
 vmware classtiming 6.0
 voices from working life about university west
 voices from students and alumni about university west
 what exciting developments is volvo working on around ai and automation?
 in the field of flexible manufacturing we see the future as humans working together with robots. when we say robots this could mean traditional robot arms working alone or side by side with humans or autonomous transporters working in the same environment as human operators.
 we aim to create a unified environment where humans and robots are working on equal terms. in other words while safety is of utmost importance the human and robot have equal responsibility in the relationship. when we work with other humans we are obligated not to hurt or injure them. the same is true when working with robots. we must work responsibly with these machines. this is a new way of looking at safety and the relationship between robots and humans.
 as a part of this we are working with generic photogrammetrybased sensor systems gpss to give machines the ability to see. very often cameras are placed on top of robots so they only see where theyre looking which creates a funnel and leaves a lot of room for error. now we are placing many cameras in the ceiling and stitching their pictures together for a complete and safer view.
 it is interesting because in a way industry is behind society in adopting new technologies. we have no concerns for example about having automated vacuum cleaners in our homes but if you introduce that type of technology in industry people raise concerns about it not being safe enough. why are we more eager to use automated technologies at home but not at work?
 we are working to create safer and more efficient working relationships between humans and robots and to demonstrate to society that modern collaborative robots have lower risk than many other activities we consider normal. we let children ride horses but are concerned about skilled adults working side by side with autonomous robots when collaborative robots are much safer and more predictable than horses we are working on the social and cognitive aspects of this issue as well as the technical.
 does this work factor into climate change andor the circular economy?
 it depends on the technology you are making and for what purposes. at volvo we have a business branch called remanufacturing taking in used components such as engines and gear boxes tearing them apart replacing worn out parts with newrenovated ones and putting them together again. this is good for the climate and also contributes to the circular economy. we are continually working to reduce the amount of energy it takes to remanufacture making the entire process smother and faster.
 volvo is also developing various kinds of autonomous vehicles allowing us to remove the large and heavy cab for example. we volvo are reducing the material used by 30 which reduces weight and energy consumption.
 will students have a chance to connect with volvo? in what ways?
 i see great opportunities in ai and automation. volvo is dependent on dedicated and ambitious people with the knowledge of these new technologies. its developing really fast. our relationship with academia is very beneficial. i think its great that we can learn from students and they can learn from us.
 what skills do you expect graduates of these programmes to have?
 sensor fusion the ability to draw conclusions from various sources of information all aspects of computer vision mastering various methods of offering ai and of course everything in real time.
 is there anything else youd like students to know?
 its great fun being an engineer in this field
 learn more about the master in ai and automation
 the job of updating our vpn is now complete and everything is working again.
 wace announces appointment of new president
 dear wace colleagues
 on behalf of the 15member wace executive committee and the board of directors dr. sampan and i are delighted to announce the appointment of dr. nancy johnston as the new wace president effective september 1 2018. dr. johnston succeeds dr. paul stonely who has served wace in exemplary fashion as ceo since 2005 and who will remain on the wace staff in a parttime advisory role.
 dr. johnston currently serves as the vice provost students and international pro tem at simon fraser university in burnaby british columbia canada where she is responsible for service and program divisions including registrar and enrollment services student affairs including wil and international services for students student recruitment and success and athletics and recreation. nancy was the former director of cooperative education and a leader in pioneering the implementation of strategic enrollment management at sfu. she holds an associate professorship in the faculty of education where she teaches in the areas of experiential and workintegrated learning.
 upon learning of her appointment nancy stated i am thrilled to have the opportunity to take a leadership role with wace at this important juncture and look forward to exploring how the association can continue to grow and develop globally.
 sincerely
 dr. maurits van rooijen                           dr. sampan silapand                                              wace board of directors cochair     wace board of directors cochair
 wace irs 2024
 read more about wace here
 for additional information or comments
 theme
 this years conference theme is workintegrated learning and the sustainable knowledge society.
 many changes in the contextual frameworks have reshaped the learning and educational landscapes of both individuals and institutions in society for centuries. this is driven by everyday people demanding access equality equity inclusion democracy empowerment leadership courage etc.
 the education society should recognize the power everyday people have on the transformation of society in particular education institutions. the education society is about the individual and her changing ways of acquiring knowledge and learning.
 for more information please visit the main conference website here
 about the conference venue
 the university west campus is located in the city center of trollhättan. it features modern facilities and offers the latest technology. city hotels are situated within short walking distance.
 there is a local airport in trollhättanvänersborg but the closest international airport is gothenburglandvetter. commuter trains between gothenburg and trollhättan run frequently and take approximately 30 minutes.
 world council and assembly on cooperative education
 gkn aerospace sweden
 vara medlem i wace global strategic council.
 university west is proud to be the regional office for wace in europe. as a regional office we are dedicated to raising awareness about the strengths of workintegrated learning wil as well as promoting wil in europe.
 this is wace
 the world council and assembly on cooperative education wace is the only international professional organization dedicated to developing expanding branding and advocating for cooperative  workintegrated education programs within industry and educational institutions.
 wace strives to create implement and maintain events programs and services geared to the support and expansion of the global industry and institutional partners network and the entire cwie community.
 duties of a wace regional office
 as a wace regional office university west complements supports and promotes the globalization of cwie through activities and events throughout the european region. we are also committed to promoting wace membership to identified institutions within this and other regions of the world.
 more specifically the wace regional office
 supports the general promotion of wace programs and services with european colleagues.
 assists with the development of business and industry partnerships and membership within the region.
 assists with hosting or hosts a wace project or event within the region e.g. conference institute special event.
 works cooperatively with all national or local cwie associations in the region in support of local and global cwie growth and development.
 serves as a member of the wace global strategic council.
 crosspromotes agreed upon events using the wace logo and mail lists for mutually agreed upon purposes.
 commits to a 35 year term and a formal mutual review prior to renewal consideration.
 our priorities as a regional office
 as a regional office university west focuses on promoting workintegrated learning in europe. our goal is to promote the commitment to the global wil charter both from institutional and company partners within europe.
 my main teaching areas include global political economy security studies development studies and workintegrated political studies.
 security politics foreign policy international relations political economy weapons trade peace  conflict
 web based distance learning
 specific information about web based distance learning
 online programme with physical meetings at university west in trollhättan sweden web based distance learning
 the programme is taught web based distance learning which means that lectures and seminars take place in the universitys digital learning environment. communication with instructors and other students is digital. during the first year there are two occasions for which you will need to be at university west in trollhättan sweden. these meetings which take place in our robot and automation facility comprise part of your examination and are therefore mandatory. the first occasion from 30 september to 4 october 2019 the second occasion is from 25 may to 29 may 2020.
 can i work while studying on this programme?
 we do not recommend that you study or work fulltime while on this programme. we assume that you can spend approximately 40 hours a week on your studies.
 is the programme taught completely web based distance learning?
 the programme is taught web based distance learning but there are two mandatory sessions that take place at university west trollhättan sweden.
 is it required that i participate in certain sessions during the day or can i put in my 40 hours a week in the afternoonevenings and at the weekends?
 there may be some sessions that take place at a certain time  for instance supervision or various types of exams. we do however try to offer these sessions both during the day and in the afternoonevenings cet when that is possible. we do not work at the weekends.
 is there compulsory group work on the programme or can i carry out my studies independently?
 the programme contains some sessions that require students to work together. this group work can be anything from an online discussion in the digital learning environment to participate in project work.
 do i need a certain type of computer to be able to participate on the programme?
 no any pc is fine a mac is okay but a pc is preferable.
 do i need any sort of technical equipment to be able to participate on the programme?
 yes you need a good internet connection and a webcam  headset with microphone.
 the web guide is a longterm plan for how university west as a higher education institution will use the website as support to achieve its goals. the web guide is based on the universitys overall vision goals and strategies.
 key words in the web guide
 description of how the website is structured
 target groups and prioritisation model
 structure and content of the website
 design technology and functionality
 impact targets followup and key performance indicators
 web organisation
 this is a web guide for university west with a focus on the universitys external website
 at the same time the web guide is a strategy for how the website should meet the visitors needs.
 the goals must be monitored measured and evaluated to see if they are met and if the website provides the intended benefit and effect.
 the web guide serves as a guide and decision basis for the web steering group which includes representatives from management functions. the guide is both a help for the web working group and the web steering group to help us design and develop the universitys web in the best possible way.
 the head of communications is responsible for the web guide.
 the key words below describe the basic ideas for university wests website and how the work of designing and developing it should be conducted.
 attract  inspire  engage
 the right content for the right visitors at the right time
 the universitys website is adapted to the target group where visitors can easily find the content they need. content and function should be userfriendly easy to absorb and the visitor should feel that the university delivers credible material. we have good knowledge and awareness of our visitors and can advise and lead them to related information.
 we have a circular calendar where we know things that are happening and that need to be communicated within our business during the year. this means that we can guide our visitors in the right direction and at the right time. for instance
 for potential students we make our offerings visible in different ways on the web and encourage dialogue and interaction with university west during application periods.
 for new students both swedish and international who need to receive practical and adapted information at the start of the semester.
 for employees opportunities to customize their own start page and get personalized information on the universitys internal website.
 easy to find and get in touch
 we are developing the web of the future
 on the universitys website we have the courage to try new ways to meet the needs of visitors. we continuously monitor the world around us to see trends and opportunities to meet our visitors needs in an everchanging society. we work agile and try things out by testing web functions for our different target groups. a modern and fitforpurpose website with a view to being at the forefront.
 a wellfunctioning web organisation
 the universitys website is also designed to support and inspire the web editors on the inside. an intuitive and userfriendly publishing environment with working workflows checklists online support and other appropriate tools helps the editor to work efficiently.
 university wests toplevel domain is  the domain name has been registered with the internet infrastructure foundation since 2005. under the toplevel domain there are a number of subdomains.
 the information hub for all information about university west. for all our target groups. external website.
 student web information support and help for our students. external website.
 staff portal information support and help for our employees. internal website. behind login.
 there are also a number of integrations from other systems for the web such as the training database and selfservice. for more information see the section design technology and functionality.
 other external domainswebsites. for example västpunkt vicechancellors blog virtual campus etc. information and inspiration for custom target groups.
 the universitys website consists of thousands of pages which are aimed at many different target groups. there is therefore a need for clear prioritization so that the web can be designed in the best way and not become a channel for information overload for our visitors. the target group prioritisation is also a guide and planning tool for how the web work should be prioritised carried out and in what order it should be done. here are the target groups in order of priority.
 prospective firstsecond cycle course and programme students
 prospective students continuing educationcareer transition
 existing students
 international students
 3. companies and organisations
 companies and municipalities for skills development and collaboration
 smaller companies seeking collaboration
 other higher education institutions foreign higher education institutions
 4. other target groups
 advocacy groups
 teachersstaff
 the prioritisation work also includes taking into account additional factors that guide what we should prioritise and in what order the web work should be carried out.
 the prioritisation must be coordinated with the communications offices operational planning as well as the universitys and the administrations overall plans and goals. the prioritisation model is an important basis for the web steering group.
 legal requirements. web accessibility gdpr etc.
 contracts and upgrades of systems
 audience prioritization see section above
 the benefit for many users. what is the impact of online work?
 privacy  security
 internal improvements. streamline for web editors and web organisation
 budget what are fixed costs what are development costs
 design of structure and content
 questions and needs from the universitys organisation regarding the development of structure new web pages menus on hv.se whether information should be on an external or internal web for example should be made in consultation with the communications divisions main web editors. they help to support and build the structure for any new content. then the responsible web editor takes over the management of the web pages.
 in their daytoday work all web editors in the organisation are helped by the writing rules that exist for the web and the training efforts that are made on an ongoing basis for web editors.
 university wests official website is hv.se and the main domain hv.se should apply as a starting point to all external communication that takes place via the web. all web pages should be placed according to
 socalled subdomains of the type subdoman.hv.se should not normally be used for external communication. there are several reasons for this
 subdomains in our regular cms with socalled own house often require increased resources in agreements with the cms supplier and for the universitys it department.
 it is easier to follow web statistics and web accessibility checks if we place web pages on hv.se. this is especially a great advantage when it comes to domains outside hv.se see below
 in exceptional cases a subdomain may be justified according to similar principles that apply to domains that are completely outside the hv.se. see below for more information.
 in special cases web pages may be allowed outside the universitys domain  arguments for this can be
 special system engineering requirements where our regular cms cannot deliver due to technology or high development costs.
 in a formal collaboration where the university is not the sole sender and where several parties will jointly publish and manage information
 for example conferences where the hosting rotates
 an example of a website where several parties collaborate and with its own domain name kommunakademin väst
 subdomain or domain outside hv.se must be approved by the head of communications in consultation with the it manager.
 language of the website
 there are a few basic requirements and guidelines that the web needs to adhere to
 authorities have an obligation to write simply neatly and comprehensibly according to the language act. link to the language act external website
 the universitys guidelines for language management
 content on hv.se should be available in swedish and english where there is a clear target group and purpose. the content should be adapted to the target group and it is not an end in itself to have a fully mirrored website.
 these aspects determine the language in which the content should be present
 information needs
 all content on hv.se must comply with legal requirements and accessibility adaptations as well as its own guidelines for the website.
 in order for the university to achieve the goal of quality assurance of content where we as a public authority comply with applicable lawsregulationsrecommendations those who handle content must comply with the legal requirements that are applicable when publishing on the internet. these include
 copyright
 public access to information and secrecy act.
 there are also a number of additional laws for government agencies to comply with including the archives act the language act and the web content accessibility guidelines wcag. the university must follow the edelegations guidelines for web development.
 responsibility for ensuring that applicable laws are complied with when handling content on hv.se website lies with the respective department or operations manager head of department head of division or equivalent. the task but not the responsibility can be delegated to the companys web editor.
 the requirements for the authority university west to be restrictive in its processing of personal data are extensive and require that the person responsible for the content of the various parts of the website is well acquainted with the legislation and observant that no content violates this legislation. the designated responsibility relationship between the content manager web editor operations manager communications and it director aims to ensure that the legal requirements are complied with.
 the eus general data protection regulation commonly referred to as gdpr regulates the handling of personal data. the legislation also applies to the web. the following are to be regarded as personal data and must be accompanied by information and the person must consent to the processing
 personal data is any kind of information that can be directly or indirectly attributed to a natural person who is alive. this means that not only such things as names and social security numbers are personal data but also usernames email addresses images audio and video recordings biometric and genetic data physiological data etc. combinations of data may also constitute personal data if the combination makes it possible to link them to a natural person.
 sensitive personal data should never be presented on the website. these include
 data revealing racial or ethnic origin political opinions religious or philosophical beliefs or tradeunion membership and the processing of genetic data biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person data concerning health or data concerning a natural persons sex life or sexual orientation.
 university wests website should reflect the universitys diversity when it comes to gender equality gender ethnic and religious diversity accessibility and participation for people with disabilities sexual equality and equal treatment regardless of age or transgender identityexpression.
 web archiving
 as a public authority the university has a responsibility to archive web pages. work is underway on principles for web archiving and legal deposit. once this has been investigated more information will be provided here.
 the universitys website must follow the graphic profile and visual identity that has been developed for material to be produced where the university is the sender. at the same time the university needs to relate to the web accessibility requirements that exist for example for contrasts and colours. see previous sections of the web guide legal requirements guidelines and accessibility adaptation.
 the web hv.se should work on different devices such as computers mobile phones and tablets.
 a number of different systems are connected to the universitys website. from several of them data is retrieved and displayed directly on the web. it requires extra quality control so that the right information is displayed to the visitor.
 educational database connected to the web
 information about employees name room number phone etc. is linked to the web
 other connections to the web can be thirdparty tools. here aspects of information security gdpr etc. should be considered.
 various forms of digital selfservice are increasingly being developed which can be linked to the web in various ways.
 as a management model we work according to the socalled asapp model. the model has a clear focus on continuous delivery with an agile way of working. with crossfunctional system management teams working closely together fast and prioritized deliveries are achieved. the system manager has a greater responsibility due to his extensive knowledge of the business.
 the technical platform for  is currently the cms tool optimizely.
 website impact goals
 the website will support the universitys operational goals and strategies as expressed in the overall operational planning övp and the departments operational planning avp.
 goal an attractive and appropriate website hv.se staff portal library web and student web that reflects the universitys goals and ambitions with the user in focus.
 at the same time the website must meet the different needs of our visitors
 in order to clarify the connection between university wests vision with overall operational goals and the visitors needs  four impact goals have been defined. here is an overall effect goal easy to find the right one which applies to all the impact goals.
 the impact goals create both user benefits for the visitor and operational benefits for university west. measurement and followup is a continuous effort that takes place in close collaboration between the communications department and web editors in the organisation. the universitys management should in an appropriate form take part in followup on how the web contributes to achieving the universitys operational goals.
 overall impact goals
 visits to the universitys website must be efficient and reliable. visitors can easily find and solve their needs
 comment in order for visitors to be satisfied with their website visit it is important that they find what they need on the website and that their errand can be carried out. in order to gain the visitors trust and show that university west is a credible sender the information needs to be correct consistent and uniform and the visitor should feel confident that they have found the right place and received all relevant information.
 responsibility the communications department has the main responsibility but all investigated web editors in the organisation have an editorial responsibility.the overall impact objective is followed up through quantitative and qualitative methods
 all web editors are trained in the web publishing tool and are responsible for checking that the web pages are up to date have correct and relevant content for the intended audience.
 key figures and concrete measurement methods for followup of this impact target can be found in the appendix to the web guide appendix to web guide  goal tracking.
 impact goals for education
 the impact goal is based on the universitys goals visions strategies övp and avp
 further develop the range of courses and study programmes continuously to meet the needs of society and working life and student demand regionally nationally and internationally strategy 2022  2024
 overall goal strengthen our brand pride and the desire to choose university west in the västra götaland region from kir vp 2022  2024
 based on these strategies and goals there is an impact goal for education
 impact goal highlight university wests educational offerings in an accessible and inclusive way and guide prospective students to make an informed study choice.
 comment all visitors regardless of background and prior knowledge who are interested in studying a programme should be able to easily find and read information about the universitys programmes.
 the web should be a guide and help our visitors find an education that suits them. the texts should be easy to understand so that everyone can absorb the information. all according to the introductory key words found in this web guide attract  inspire  engage.
 one of the websites most important purposes is to recruit students to the universitys degree programmes. all courses and programmes must be presented in swedish and in english where the programme is offered to international students. courses and programmes that are offered to an external target group must be presented in hv.seutbildning.
 university wests website follows ethical guidelines for student recruitment established by the association of swedish higher education institutions suhf. this means providing clear relevant and accurate information to prospective students on objective grounds.
 the impact goal of education is followed up through quantitative and qualitative methods.
 surveys on prospective students user experience of applying for and enrolling in a course on the website.
 all programmes and courses should be able to be found and listed on the web for current offerings.
 key figures and concrete measurement methods for this impact target can be found in the appendix to the web guide appendix to web guide  goal tracking.
 the impact goal is based on the universitys goals visions strategies övp and avp.
 impact goals for collaboration and work integrated learning
 impact goal facilitate collaboration between the university and the surrounding community. it should be easy to find and get in touch with the university.
 goals for the web organisation
 avoid organisational perspectives and instead focus on the needs of the target groups
 ensure better collaboration within the organisation
 get a more vibrant dynamic website with better quality
 develop clearer roles with assigned responsibilities and mandates
 increase the competence of web editors
 the design of the organisation aims to
 a clear division between strategic work and daytoday operational work.
 tasks and powers must be clear for all roles the mandate must be clear
 everyone who is referred to as head web editor or web editor must have this role described in their job description or equivalent as well as time set aside for this.
 the number of web editors will be reduced and professionalism will increase fewer people will work with the web for a larger part of their working hours
 create consensus and collaboration on the web and communication and to gain broad support throughout the organisation for web work its opportunities and development.
 the main web editors are responsible for a larger part of the web. the editors are organisationally linked to the division of communication and international relations or to the university library.
 the web editor is responsible for a clearly limited part of the web and is there as the page manager. one purpose of having web editors is to create consensus and collaboration on web and communication and to gain broad support throughout the organisation for web work its opportunities and development.
 web editors can be employees of departments andor administration. the web editor is responsible for producing the necessary information. responsible for ensuring that the information is accurate uptodate and relevant to the target group.
 if necessary the web editor enlists the help of the main web editor on issues such as web structure graphics images and help with refining text material. the web editor decides what needs to be translated into english.
 useful web services at university west
 microsoft 365 office email etc
 office 365 is a web based solution for email and document management as well as teams and sharepoint for collaboration in groups. you will find your student email in office and it is important that you use your student email because you get a lot of the information from university west to this address. read more about office and how to log in to the system
 canvas  learning platform
 canvas is university wests learning platform. canvas is used as a pedagogical tool to execute courses.  in canvas you will always find course information schedule and reading list. depending on your teachers choice you may also come across quizzes assignments video clips lecture material discussion forums and much more. go to canvas
 zoom emeeting service is used for networkbased meetings eseminars tutoring and group  work. go to zoom emeeting service
 all students at university west have access to the universitys network and services by using their personal university west account. my account is the system where you manage your account and edit your personal information. its also where you go if you have forgot your password or wish to extend your account. go to my account
 ladok for students is a web service for students at university west. recommended browsers are google chrome mozilla firefox and microsoft edge. the service is also adapted for smaller screens such as mobile phones and tablets. go to ladok for students
 the files in the home directory at university west can be accessed from any internet connected computer via the system my files. go to my files
 sendfiles is a web service that makes it easy for you to send files that are too large to send by mail. in sendfiles you can send large files of up to 20.0 gb to people within and outside university west. go to sendfiles
 fulltext access with libkey nomad
 when you browse a website with your computer off campus you can use the libkey nomad browser tool. with this web browser plugin you can quickly and easily see if we have access to the sites full text articles ebooks databases and other electronic material. go to libkey nomad.
 web survey  staff and students
 to you who are employed and  or studying at university west  do you want to answer the web survey?
 how is the web survey conducted?
 in 2022 you who are an employee and  or student at university west will have the opportunity to participate in a survey with questions about inclusion and exclusion at the university. the survey aims to map and understand how employees and students at university west perceive that ethnicity and other grounds for discrimination affect ones conditions and opportunities within the academy.
 you can download the speech synthesis tortalk free of charge via university wests website and in this way have the survey read out as a complement to the written text.
 links to the surveys
 consent letter web survey?
 here you can read more about the consent letter for the web survey.
 webbutveckling med html och css 75 hp wuh100
 webbsupport
 grants and innovations office
 tina hilleborn
 microsoft 365 office epost mm
 access till fulltext med libkey nomad
 get to know all our masters programmes in 5 days welcome to our webinar with online presentations of all our masters programmes. you will meet teachers and can also ask questions
 november 22  26 12001245 cet every day
 click here to join
 monday 22 november
 work integrated political studies  per assmo
 leadership in digitalised organisations   kristina johansson
 tuesday 23 november
 production management  ulf hulling
 cybersecurity  fatiha djebbar
 it and management  abdulghafour mohammad
 wednesday 24 november
 autonomous vehicles  thomas pederson
 thursday 25 november
 robotics and automation  anders appelgren
 metal additive manufacturing  robert pederson
 friday 26 november
 finance  maher asal
 read more about the programmes and apply
 presentation of all our masters programmes
 work integrated political studies  per assmo
 production management  ulf hulling
 cybersecurity  fatiha djebbar
 it and management  abdulghafour mohammad
 autonomous vehicles  thomas pederson
 robotics and automation  anders appelgren
 metal additive manufacturing  robert pederson
 finance  maher asal
 we welcome your application
 meet our teachers and students  here you can see all our webinars in retrospect.
 webmaster heltid campus tgwem
 wednesday oct 18 ev. disturbances when logging in to primula
 wednesday 1810 there may be disruptions with logging into primula between 812
 welcome  your start of the semester
 do you want to feel connected and meet new friends now that your studies are starting? during welcome you will have the opportunity to get to know the campus and meet other students. we mix business with pleasure to make you feel welcome at your new campus in the best possible way
 welcome is the universitys concept for the start of the semester. the goal is to mix business with a little pleasure during your first time as a student with us. we know for example how important it is to find new friends understand how the campus is structured and that all digital systems work as they should. therefore rest assured we create a nice atmosphere with a little entertainment. or give a lecture on study techniques. and when you enter through the entrance we are ready to help you. whether you need help finding your room or wondering where you can microwave your lunch box. were here for you.
 so a warm welcome to us
 during this week we will offer guided campus tours. please note that you have to book theese beforehand. these are the dates and times
 wednesday 288 kl.13.00  15.30 guided campus tours. for more information and tour bookings click here.
 thursday 298 kl.13.00  15.30 guided campus tours. for more information and tour bookings click here.
 our focus this week is to make you feel warmly welcome to our campus. you can rest assured that well show you the way if you cant find it. our staff is on site and ready to assist you. heres whats happening during the week
 monday 29 from 1200 to 1330 you can enjoy live music on campus. additionally well provide some refreshments. take the opportunity to listen socialize and get to know your new classmates. this is a voluntary event.
 tuesday 29 we offer music in the main area and coffee. our guides will also be available to help you find your way. on wednesday 39 we offer music in the main area and coffee. our guides will also be available to help you find your way.
 all week the orientation an event called inslussningen with the student union shv is an excellent opportunity to make new friends and make the most of your student life. learn more about the program here.
 during this week the student unions shv activities with inslussningen continues. for more information click here.
 during this week you will have the opportunity to meet our educational support services. perhaps you need extra support and assistance or some helpful tips on study techniques? we are here to answer questions and create conditions for you to succeed in your studies in the best possible way.
 more information and schedules will be published later
 introduction days for international students
 weldability aspects of special metals
 weldability aspects of specialty metals international visiting professor nicolas coniglio
 dr. nicolas coniglio will contribute on a significant and sustainable basis to advancing the knowledge of welding and additive manufacturing such as weldability solidification cracking hydrogen embrittlement and insitu instrumentation.
 welding  weldingbased additive manufacturing  level 2
 physical process simulation
 the area of physical process simulation develops models to describe heat sources such as electric arc or laser as well as the melt pool that can be used to predict the formation of porosity defects temperature and stress gradients etc.
 the area of process control focuses on improving process parametrization and automation sensing monitoring and control.
 senior lecturer                        docent associate professor
 senior lecturer                        associate professor
 welding automation for lighter aircraft engines  g5 demo
 welding in practice parttime campus tsv600
 the course covers how health and safety risks can be handled during welding. the course consists of practical exercises in the form of welding laboratories for the processes of oxygas welding gas metal arc welding gmaw and flux cored arc welding fcaw manual metal arc welding mma and tungsten inert gas welding tig.
 further welding and weldingrelated processes such as brazing plasma welding submerged arc welding friction welding laser welding electron beam welding and resistance welding are covered in the course. the focus is on the execution of the welding operation and the effect of different process parameters on the weld quality.
 sjl600welding metallurgy of ironbased alloys and
 asp700advanced welding processes or the equivalent.
 the welding processes available are
 friction stir welding
 measuring instruments
 a number of measuring instruments used specifically for scientific purposes are available in the welding lab. examples of these are
 a pyrometer which measures thermal radiation
 special camera equipment that filters laser light
 a laser scanner that measures geometries and profiles of weld joints
 data logging of weld parameters like current and voltage
 welding is regarded as a mature technology but still there are many challenging developments taking place both with new techniques like friction stir welding and with established processes like migmag welding. exploitation of these new developments is a core activity for the welding technology group. some explanations are given below.
 tandem welding means that two welding wires controlled by separate power sources are fed into the weld pool simultaneously. this allows higher welding speed and higher productivity.
 migmag low heat input methods
 low heat input welding allows welding of thin sheets in a better way than traditional migmag welding. the lower heat input can be achieved in different ways for example by pulsing of the welding current.
 plasma welding is also a traditional welding process which is gaining increasing interest due to the high productivity and high quality achievable. it is also of interest as a hybrid process in combination with mig welding.
 the advantage of laser welding is the minimal heat input to the material being welded. with laser welding deep and narrow weld joints can be produced with high welding speed. also this process is sometimes combined with migmag welding into laser hybrid welding.
 friction stir involves a rotating tool moving forwards in the joint between two sheets of metal lying next to each other. the metal does not melt as with fusion welding but it softens due to the friction heat so the metal sheets can be joined together. the temperature is considerably lower than in conventional welding.
 by additive manufacturing it is possible to build up new geometries on a component drop by drop. the technique can be seen as a cost and resource effective alternative to traditional manufacturing. this process involves a metal wire being fed forward and melted using a laser. the process is more or less the same as rapid prototyping but in this case finished metal components are the result.
 welding metallurgy and cracking in superalloys  weldmecs
 the project is a cooperation between university west coordinator of the project chalmers university of technology and luleå university of technology. an extensive range of weldability testing using a newly built varestraint testing equipment will be conducted at university west. some of the tests require the use of a so called gleeble testing equipment. this will be subcontracted to an external organization. chalmers will carry out very detailed investigations of the materials in the welds and luleå university of technology is responsible for developing a simulation model capable of predicting when cracking will occur. the project will require extensive collaboration and crossfeeding of results between all three universities involved.
 welding metallurgy of advanced material parttime campus svm610
 this course provides insight into the welding metallurgy of advanced materials such as highstrength structural and stainless steel. the weldability of other advanced materials like aluminium magnesium titanium copper and nickel alloys is included in this course. the various aspects related to dissimilar materials joining are also covered. furthermore the course covers testing and characterizations of welded joints to evaluate weld quality microstructure and mechanical properties.
 welding metallurgy of ironbased alloys parttime campus sjl600
 this course provides insight into the welding metallurgy of steels and cast irons that are commonly used in the industry by first proving an overview of related manufacturing processes to understand the connection to the materials properties and their influence on the welding process. it is studied how thermal cycles present during welding change the microstructure and properties of welded material. furthermore the course covers various aspects related to welding metallurgy quality defects and corrosion properties as well as different mechanical failure mechanisms.
 welding of high strength steels
 high strength steels are of interest for many new constructions. with more high strength steels the construction can become lighter which for example for vehicles can mean lower fuel consumption or higher pay load.
 one limitation for an increased use of high strength steels is that they are more difficult to weld and that the welding impairs important properties. university west therefor run several projects together with swedish industry where the aim is to investigate different aspects of welding of these steels and come up with recommendations how to weld them. through these projects we hope to contribute to remove some of the obstacles for increased future usage of these steels with benefits for the environment. companies cooperating in the projects are for example ssab and esab both world leading in the field of high strength steels and welding.
 welding of superalloys
 superalloys are metals mainly consisting of nickel alloyed with a lot of other metallic elements. these superalloys are used for example in aerospace engines for parts becoming extremely hot. other metals like steel cannot be used at these temperatures since they loose their strength. superalloys are used in both cast and forged conditions and as sheets.
 in another project the effect of heat treatment of cast material so called homogenisation on the properties of welded joints will be studied. there exists a number of different recommendations for how the homogenisation shall be performed but the knowledge about how these recommendations in combination with different welding methods affect the welded joint is limited. the aim of the project is to achieve a fundamental understanding how the microstructure after homogenisation affects the weldability and come up with recommendations about how the homogenisation shall be performed to achieve optimised properties.
 welding processes parttime campus svp700
 welding is a widely used manufacturing process with applications ranging from nano to mega component sizes from art to rockets including simple school benches or gates and sophisticated bridges nuclear powered vessels and automobiles.
 in engineering applications welding and the correlated manufacturing methods must be quality assured by strict standards according to the consequence potentiality of a failure. not only consumables must be homologated to be used in constructions but all personnel involved welder supervisors inspectors and engineers must be qualified and certified by independent and often international agencies.
 considering the global industrial demands for quality improvement and process cost reduction almost every day a new process or feedstock appears in the market. in addition challenges of novel designs in terms of material size shape and dimensional tolerances should be handled. therefore more engineers that understand the principles of this multidisciplinary technology are required.
 the objective of this course is to present the welding processes with a holistic view by combining fundamentals and applications.the attendants will learn tools of overcoming challenges of welding processes and joint preparation selection through the understanding of scientific fundamentals taking into account aspects such as adequacy for the application costs production capacity and side effects such as metallurgical modifications and thermal stress generation.
 the intended audience is of engineers that wish to work in welding metalwork production lines of industrial companies aiming to acting as decision makers for improvements and innovations. the course is also designed as a base for engineers that want to follow a carrier within welding as a welding inspector or welding engineer.
 degree of bachelor of science in mechanical engineering manufacturing engineering industrial engineering or equivalent. the bachelor of science degree must be comprised of a at least 7.5 credits of materials science and at least 15 credits of mathematics including basic knowledge of analysis linear algebra and statistics. in addition verified knowledge of english corresponding to the course english b english 6 in the swedish high school or equivalent.
 information about project weldvr.
 for teachers that wants to upload images to weld vr  click here
 it is wellknown that digitalization is a strategic objective for högskolan väst. in alignment with that virtual reality vr and augmented reality ar are gradually getting more and more presence at different education levels from undergraduate till courses developed for the industry on virtual factories. it is clear that the topic is interdisciplinary and it is necessary is to build up the interdepartmental collaboration between the engineering department and the economics and informatics department.
 in the division of welding technology it is long since we have the vision to incorporate vr in our welding labs for several reasons the vr labs can be applicable in both distance and campus education when the access to the labs is difficult covid19 expensive cost in metallographic preparations in time or in materials or dangerous welding fumes arc radiation electric shock.
 1.      to develop a vr lab for microscopy and a vr lab for welding processes.
 the students after using the microscopy vr lab should be able to learn how to manipulate and work with a conventional optical microscope and they will learn about the microstructure of different metal alloys. after using the welding processes vr lab the students will learn how the welding parameters influence the quality of the resulting welds.
 2.      to implement these labs in our courses test them and have the opportunity to improve and adjust them with the input and feedback of real students.
 in the development of it applications it is an essential part of the process to iterate and to try the applications with students in different courses and with different methods vr vs desktop in order to detect problems and to adjust and tune the applications.
 3.       to disseminate the results of this project among the community internally and externally.
 it is necessary to communicate internally at university the existence of these labs and to encourage the potential teachers to use it. it is necessary also to disseminate our work in the scientific community and to prepare conference andor journal publications related.
 the application containing the microscopy and welding labs is available upon request as a windows executable that can be run in either desktop or vr mode assuming the necessary equipment.
 initial explorations of using pixel streaming have been made. pixel streaming makes it possible to run the application in desktop mode from any computer through a web browser. it is even possible to run the application via a mobile phone although this interaction is not currently enabled. note however that this solution requires an instance running on cloud computers for each user and thus entails a running cost.
 we have also made a version of the application available via oculus applabs for test users. this required each user to be added to a list of testers but with that setup it is possible to download and update the application directly in the oculus meta quest vr headset.
 b.      implication in education at ei department
 this project has involved 12 students resulting in 5 bachelor thesis 3 master theses and 5 course projects
 bachelor theses
 1.      kiran kumar spring 2020 exm560 bachelor thesis work in mechanical engineering
 3.      daniel vrban  victor magnusson spring 2021 exi500 bachelor in informatics
 4.      gabriel wrede betiel yohannes spring 2021 exi500 bachelor in informatics
 5.      simon hedlund spring 2021 exi500 bachelor in informatics.
 6.      henrik lundberg  sebastian jubell spring 2022 exi500 bachelor in informatics
 master theses
 2.      line pedersen spring 2022 exi802  degree project in informatics master
 3.      daniel löfström spring 2023 exi802  degree project in informatics master not available yet
 2.      line pedersen autumn 2021 imc600  immersive computing.
 as per december 2021 the following equipment has been purchased
 soldamatic welding simulator
 htc vive focus 3  vrheadset
 dell precision tower cto  stationary vrcomputer
 license for reality capture
 participation at the annual assembly of the iiw international institute of welding in july 2023 with a conference paper to disseminate the project.
 west card  your keycard and library card
 do you need to enter campus outside opening hours? do you need to open a booked group room or borrow books from the library?  then you as a student or employee at  university west need a west card. the west card is a keycard printing and library card that you use during your time as a student and employee at university west. you can get your personal west card at the servicecenter anytime during the semester.
 this is how you get your card
 the west card is personal and you can only get a west card if you are an employee or registered as a student on a course or program at university west. you can get it at our servicecenter after your are registered and have created an account. bring your id. you return the west card after you have finished your studies or employment. if you study on distance yo do not need a west card.
 create an account? go to   select create account and follow the intructions.
 forgot your pin code? go to  select edit and follow intructions.
 enter the university outside opening hours
 to enter the university outside opening hours you hold up your card in front of the readersweap placed beside the entrance doors. then you enter your personal code. you need to leave campus at 2300 the latest. in the morning you can enter at the earliest at 0600 if you are an employee and at 0700 if you are a student.
 lockunlock instructions
 to be able to unlock group rooms or offices you need the validate the card. by validating your card it is activated for a period of 12 hours. the validating points are  located strategically around the campus.
 how to validate your card
 you place the card in one of the validation points and enter your 4digit personal code. hold up the card again and wait for the little green man. by validating your card it is activated for a period of 12 hours.
 how to set the door in an unlocked position
 hold the card still against the reader. a green light flashes once.remove the card. wait a maximum of 3 seconds.
 hold the card still against the reader. a green light now flashes 4 times. the door is now in an unlocked position.
 how to set the door back to a locked position
 hold the card still against the reader. a yellow light flashes once.remove the card. wait a maximum of 3 seconds.
 hold the card still against the reader. a green light now flashes 4 times.the door is now in a locked position.
 rules for the west card
 it is your responsibility to make yourself aware of the rules that apply to the use of your west card during the period in which you possess one.the card is a valuable item and has several functions at university west.the card is personal to you and must not be lent to anyone else.the card and the pin code should not be kept in the same place.never allow anyone who does not have permission to be on campus by letting them in with your card.if you lose your card you must as soon as you become aware that it is missing contact the reception tel. no 0520 22 30 00 and report it as lost. if you need a replacement card a charge of 50 sek will be made.in cases of repeated misuse the university can demand the return of your card.treat your card carefully and make sure that it is not bent or exposed to moisture or extremes of temperature.for library loans and the loanrental of technical equipment special rules apply. if you use these services you are responsible for acquainting yourself with the particular regulations that apply.on the completion of your studies you must return the card to the servicecenter.
 if you have any questions about the west card please contact the servicecenter.
 department leaders at ptw can order access tag for staff and students.
 when a case has been received and a tag has been created a message is sent to the requester and the person who will use the tag. the case is subsequently closed. tag can be found in the service center on campus for collection upon presentation of id document recipient form must be signed and copy given to the visitor. the signed form is stored in a binder at campus support.
 the person who orders a tag must notify changes in access if for example the person quits prematurely. changes are communicated to the service center as a regular matter. the tag should be returned to the service center when the person should no longer have access to the premises. lost tag must be reported to the service center.
 delivery time to get eligibility is 5 working days.
 what happens once i have applied?
 if you have submitted an application for studies or internship at one of our partner universities it will take about 3 weeks before you hear from us as we need to make a selection of applicants on available places. the response time may be shorter in some cases but rarely longer.
 if you are accepted you will be requested to attend an information sessions where we will tell you about the next steps in the process and you will have the opportunity to ask us questions.
 what is it like teaching with social robots?
 technological developments and digitalisation are increasingly shaping society and also the world of education. a new thesis from university west provides a description of how teaching with social robots can be done and how the role of the teacher is affected making them more of a mentor who makes the interaction between student and robot work.
 sara describes what a social robot is.
 a social robot senses the presence of people and you can talk to it and make eye contact with it. it can convey emotions by looking happy or sad for instance. the one we used has movable joints that can simulate humanlike body language.
 teacher behaviour studied
 this thesis studies how the teacher acts in a learning activity in which a child is collaborating with a social learning robot. the child and the robot play a digital maths game together on an interactive board. the robot is designed to act as an inquisitive learning companion tutee while the child acts as a teacher tutor. the study is mainly based on video observations of teachers actions as part of this learning activity and a total of over 25 hours of recorded video has been analysed. the observations are complemented by interviews workshops and surveys giving more teachers an opportunity to reflect on teaching with social robots.
 teacher role affected
 the use of social learning robots creates a complex teaching situation and affects the role actions and responsibilities of the teacher in the classroom.
 few studies highlight the role and actions of the teacher and that was something that i wanted to try to describe. the results of this study show that using a social learning robot can create interesting and relevant learning situations and teachers confirm that the robot fulfils an educational function explains sara.
 the most prominent teacher role observed is that of an interaction mentor. in this role the teacher assists with the verbal and nonverbal interaction between the child and the robot.
 it mostly involves helping the child to talk to the robot explaining the robots questions and how the robot interprets the childs answers. but it also involves explaining the robots behaviour to the child and ensuring that the child and the robot focus their attention on one another says sara.
 several challenges
 the study also shows that the robot brings with it many challenges. for instance a number of technical problems arise that require the teacher to act as a technical facilitator. the different ways in which the teacher relates to the robot present another challenge.
 sometimes the teacher views the robot as a didactic tool and sometimes as a social actor. this duality leads to conflicts in the teachers actions as the two perspectives are not always compatible.
 this involves considering which learning object should be the focus of the current activity for instance and what social norms are reasonable in a childrobot collaboration.
 the thesis also shows that the use of social learning robots places new demands on what adequate digital competence involves. technical competence which refers to computer security and programming skills is one aspect of the concept of competence.
 the robot comes equipped with both cameras and microphones and so a lot of information about the child is recorded and collected and it is necessary to know how to handle this data.
 another aspect is critical competence which includes various ethical dilemmas that arise if social robots are used in educational contexts.
 in a way the child is tricked into believing that the robot is something it is not that it has feelings and becomes a friend. it is necessary to know what to do when interaction turns into a relationship for example. is that desirable? and where does one draw the line?
 a third aspect is practical competence which involves being able to interact with social learning robots yourself but also about being able to understand and use the robots two perspectives to achieve the objective of the teaching.
 i hope that my thesis will help to increase awareness of the opportunities and challenges involved in using social learning robots and that schools can gain an insight into the new requirements for digital skills that will emerge when educational technologies exhibit social characteristics and behaviours.
 to the thesis teaching with social robots
 contact sara ekström phd in informatics specialising in work integrated learning university west sara.ekstrom@hv.se
 what will happen to professional skills when work is handed over to technology?
 when and where can i go abroad?
 what possibilities you have to go abroad depends on what programme you are studying. in some programmes students have a full elective semester of studies in some programmes not.
 we have created web pages per department at university west where the options for each study programme is listed and also in some cases recommended partner universities  so start by checking these at the page with information about exchange at your department
 if you study single subject courses at university west you will need to contact a study councellor to find out what courses would be required for a specific degree or diploma at university west.
 you also have below a link to a database of all exchange agreements available but you also keep the following in mind
 check with which partner universities you are able to study the subject area you are interested in.
 surf the partner universities web pages and compare the courses they offer in english to exchange students.
 contact your departmental coordinator or programme manager in order to verify that the courses you intend to study abroad can be included in your degree here at university west.
 make sure to apply in good time  it takes time to find the right study places and the number of seats for each partner university is limited. we recommend that you choose three options for this reason in your application.
 read more about exchange at your department
 digitalisation is increasingly present in our working lives and we rely on machines and artificial intelligence more and more.
 at the same time people risk losing their unique ability to discern nuances and perform informed evaluations. our professional judgement can be eroded in the long term says anders sandblad the worlds first doctor of work integrated learning at university west.
 digitalisation and artificial intelligence are centre stage at the moment. the debate is mostly about what the technology can be used for and the risk of robots acquiring human abilities and characteristics.
 anders recent dissertation highlights the professional knowledge that is at risk of being lost in our increasingly digitalised workplace and society. and the importance of understanding and managing the consequences.
 i am not critical of the technology per se but of the exaggerated belief that it can solve tasks where humans are actually unbeatable. humans have dimensions and abilities that cannot be transferred to machines. for example robots cannot assess human needs perceive nuances and perform informed evaluations when it comes to complex situations and events.
 he explains that peoples professional skills and unique abilities can be lost over time as we adapt our way of thinking and perceiving reality to the logic of machines. for example we lose the practical and experiential knowledge that is used in individual situations  in the face of the unique and unexpected and in situations that are so complex that they become impossible to fully control.
 for example a process description on paper does not tell the whole story and requires experience to be used properly. this is known as tacit knowledge  knowledge that cannot be expressed precisely or fully as definitions models and metrics. it is knowledge that develops when people share and reflect on their own and others experiences. it also includes knowledge that can only be expressed when people are in the same physical place.
 work quality is eroded
 so what happens when peoples professional skills slowly disappear?
 as more and more tasks are transferred to technology we tend to focus our responsibility on the technology and the processes we use rather than on the task and its results. the consequence is that we gradually lose important human professional skills  our unique ability to discern nuances and perform informed evaluations. in addition work quality is eroded.
 education provides a humanistic perspective
 anders sees bildung as a tool for safeguarding peoples unique knowledge and skills in the workplace. by bildung he means knowledge and insights about people life and the use of technology.
 when i trained as an engineer 25 years ago my great interest in technology was a strong driving force. today i realise that technology education also needs to include humanistic elements that highlights the human aspects of technology use.
 by including literary classics art and other cultural elements that concern the human relationship with technology students can gain humanistic perspectives on technology development. classic works by ibsen strindberg and shakespeare for example provide important insights into life people and the use of technology.
 peoples professional skills need to be harnessed. otherwise there is a real risk that the wave of digitalisation we are in will backfire in a few years time says anders.
 read anders sandblads dissertation professional skill. machines. humans.
 article from 27 may 2021
 in order to prevent corruption and malpractise there is strong legal protection for whistleblowers. here you can read about what it means and how you can do a whistleblowing to university west.
 about whistleblowing
 university west strives to maintain a good administrative culture and counter corruption and other irregularities. socalled whistleblowers play a central role in safeguarding and promoting important values in a democratic society such as openness and transparency.
 in accordance with the act 2021 890 on the protection of persons who report malpractice the whistleblower act the university has established safe channels for whistleblowing. it is possible to blow the whistle in writing by phone or in a personal meeting. in order for the person reporting to feel safe all whistleblowing is handled confidentially by the external party kpmg.
 under the headings below you can find important information on how the protection for whistleblowers works and how to make a whistle blow report.
 what can be reported?
 the whistleblowing should refer to irregularities that are in the public interest to be disclosed. the information must therefore concern the public and not the reporting persons own working or employment conditions.
 individual conditions t may in some cases be of general interest if for example they are about repeated or systematic violations that can be considered unacceptable from a broader societal perspective. violations of internal regulations such as codes of conduct may in some cases be of general interest.
 whistleblowing may also refer to violations of certain eu rules and swedish rules that implement or supplement the eu rules. the eu rules covered are listed in annex 1 to directive eu 20191936 of the european parliament and of the council of 23 october 2019 on the protection of persons reporting infringements of union law.
 the reporting person does not need to have actual evidence. reasonable concerns or suspicions are sufficient.
 who may report and be protected
 to be protected by the whistleblower act the reporting person must stand in a work relation to the university. affiliation is indicated in connection with reporting.
 to be protected by the whistleblower act you are
 an employee or has an assignment equal to an employment
 hired staff
 seeking or performing internships or volunteer work
 a selfemployed person seeking or performing assignments
 a person who is part of the university adminitration management or supervisory body
 the protection also applies when you have left university west.
 what should not be reported?
 the whistleblower protection does not apply
 when you report as a student or citizen of the community
 if what you report is not in the public interest or does not constitute a violation of specified laws
 if what you report only concerns your own working or employment relationships and it is not about corrupt acts
 if you intentionally and knowingly report false information or commit a crime through the reporting
 whether what you report concerns securityclassified information in accordance with the security protection act 2018 585 or other information concerning the nations security.
 what does the protection mean?
 the protection for whistleblowers means a ban for university west to prevent or try to prevent reporting and to take retaliation due to reporting. the protection also consists of discharge from liability and the right to damages if the university violates the prohibitions.
 preventive measures may consist of the university offering a benefit in order that someone does not consult with their employee organization.
 retaliation is for example dismissal nonpromotion changed work tasks changed workplace salary reduction and changed working hours.
 discharge means that you cannot be convicted of a breach of confidentiality if you blow a whistle. in order to be released from liability the person reporting must have had reasonable grounds to assume that the reporting of precisely the information that was covered by the duty of confidentiality was necessary to reveal the misconduct.
 discharge is not given in the event of intentional violation of socalled qualified duty of confidentiality according to the public access to information and secrecy act 2009 400 or duty of confidentiality according to the defense inventions act 1971 1078.
 discharge is also not given when a whistleblower hands over documents. however discharge applies if the person reporting does so orally or in some other way reports without handing over a document.
 whistleblowing protection does not apply if the reporting person commits a crime by obtaining information. this can be for example theft unlawful intrusion data intrusion espionage or an unauthorized position with secret information.
 reporting
 to internal reporting channels
 alternative ways to report
 to other reporting channels
 freedom of communication and discharge
 why study at university west?
 there are many reasons to choose sweden and university west as  the home of your studies. with over 11.000 students and more than 600 employees we make up one of swedens highest number of applicants per place. we have high quality in our teaching and a high standard of facilities classrooms laboratories computers library etc.. the quality is particularly apparent in recent statistics where university west is one of the best in sweden when it comes to students employment rates according to measurements from the swedish higher education authority. we are comfortably above national average with a full 83.3 percent of our students established in the labour market one year after graduating. work integrated learning our pedagogical profile increases students chances of making valuable contacts during their studies and gives them valuable work experience.
 university west is a driving force within society working together with the surrounding community to create knowledge and to make this knowledge accessible to a wider audience. we call this work integrated learning.
 why we exist
 the needs of our students and society take centre stage. we work to help our students become critically reflective engaged social citizens with the skills that society needs.
 we want to create the right conditions for academia and the surrounding society to come together and for theoretical and practical knowledge to flow between them. in this way we will create useful new knowledge together for the benefit of everyone enabling us to make a real difference. we call this work integrated learning wil and this is also our overall profile.
 wifi  hvguest
 wifi hvguest  installation guide
 this wifi is primarily for people who are temporarily at the university. with our wifi hvguest youll get free internet access for 4 hours. when you are within the range of the wifi hvguest youll be able to see hvguest among the wireless networks on your device.
 for you who are a student we recommend the wireless network eduroam. when you have installed it your smartphone tablet or laptop will connect automatically to the network when you are at campus or other places where eduroam is available.
 smartphone and tablet
 connect to hvguest. go to settings on your phonetablet select wifi select hvguest.
 accept the terms of use.
 you will now get a connection to hvguest for 4 hours. then you have to accept the terms again if you need additional time.
 connect to hvguest. the icon wireless network can be found in the lower right corner. select hvguest and click connect.
 start your browser and follow the instructions.
 we recommend you who are a student at university west to use our wifi eduroam. after installing eduroam you get an automatic connection to internet as soon as you come to the university campus and other places where eduroam is available.
 eduroam is available at almost all european universities and at airports libraries hotels and train stations. it is also available in other parts of the world.
 how do i connect to eduroam?
 in order to use eduroam you must have an university west account and have proven your identity. please note that if you have got a west card you have already proven your identity you will find more information on how to identify yourself under the heading how do i identify myself?.
 when you have proven your identity follow the installation guide on the guide page under the heading wireless network. if you have installed eduroam earlier and already know how it works you can go directly to eduroam.hv.se to install eduroam on your device.
 go to the guide page
 the easiest way to prove your identify is to show a valid photo id at the servicecenter and say that you want to prove your identity. the vast majority have already done so in connection with getting the west card.
 another possible way to prove your identity is by using an electronic identification. in our system you can do so by browsing to  click edit log in and choose to identify yourself. then you are able to prove your identity by signing in with the login you received from antagning.se
 more information on eduroam    in swedish
 information about wifi wireless network at university west
 at university west there is the wireless network eduroam which is a global network that makes it possible for students and staff at many universities and colleges to access the internet.
 wifi for students and staff
 if you are a student at university west it is recommended to use our wifi eduroam. once you have installed eduroam your device will connect to eduroam as soon as you are in the range of an eduroam network.
 wifi for guests
 wifi  hvguest is primarily for you who are temporarily at the university. with our wifi hvguest youll get free internet access for 4 hours. when you are within the range of the wifi hvguest youll be able to see hvguest among the wireless networks on your device.
 wifi at university west
 for students and employees
 for you who are temporarily visiting campus
 wil 25  work integrated learning
 wil25 is the third international conference on workintegrated learning. the conference will be hosted by university west sweden in collaboration with kristiania university college. the conference will take place from september 29th to october 1st at kristianias campus in oslo norway. warmly welcome
 more info. wil25  work integrated learning  kristiania
 wil and collaboration
 how does this affect the universitys interaction with the surrounding community?
 as we see it advanced knowledge which is characterized by complex problem solving can be found in many parts of society especially since more and more swedes have academic degrees. the academys socalled monopoly on knowledge was broken up years ago if it ever really existed. processes are twoway streets and advanced knowledge flows in both directions. this increases the relevance of cooperation for all the involved parties.
 not only do we safeguard and develop advanced knowledge turning out students who are well prepared for a long professional life the academy produces active mature citizens to serve a democratic society. cooperation with the surrounding community and wil provide students at university west with an opportunity to develop these skills through concrete contributions to an everchanging societal context.
 wil and education
 wil and academic quality in education
 cooperation and the exchange of ideas with those outside the academy are aspects of our policy that generate quality and are especially prioritised at university west. we become more influential by engaging with new advanced knowledge shared with us by our partners. placing this knowledge in the context of academic theories and methods brings about a continuing evermorevaluable exchange of ideas. wil is our instrument for processing the basic knowledge that forms the foundation of any institution of higher learning. as a quality indicator wil signals the important force for development that the academy represents in a progressive society.
 students at university west receive highquality support and guidance in order to achieve their academic goals. as citizens they are particularly well prepared for longterm engaged work in a flexible environment where lifelong learning is a given.
 wil provides students with many opportunities to test their skills in an actual work setting. placement periodsinternships are one way to do this. we also offer many other forms of work integrated learning such as cooperative education student employment project work field studies and mentorship projects. wil transcends the notion of a hierarchical order that places scholarly theoretical knowledge above the knowledge and skills acquired in the workplace. there are many everyday learning situations in which it is normal and practical to work across boundaries integrating various methods and approaches.
 through wil students at university west develop a special ability to move back and forth between the abstract and the concrete. they can in both the planning and the execution of a task make conscious deliberative decisions. this demands independent thinking as well as the ability to see the possible consequences of various choices do follow up and evaluate the effects of ones actions.
 in other words wil increases students chances of achieving their academic goals since they acquire firsthand experience in the integration of relevant knowledge with its application thus developing them as individuals. indeed university west graduates are well prepared for sustainable employment which in turn offers a wealth of opportunities for personal development. in short we turn out mature active democratic citizens as called for by the european goals for higher education.
 wil24 was the second international conference on workintegrated learning. the conference was hosted by university west sweden in collaboration with central university of technology cut south africa.
 thank you to all participants presenters and organizers
 see you at kristiania university college in norway in 2025 for wil25 more information about that conference can be found here
 about wil24
 the theme of the wil24 conference was work integrated learning for global engagement and societal development.
 the increasingly global and rapidly changing world display the importance of knowledge creation and learning in a lifelong perspective for a more sustainable future. there is a need to reframe the roots of working and learning to make them simultaneously relevant in the context of the current global challenges.
 you can find the general programme here
 you can find the detailed session programme here
 to access the book of abstracts for the conference please click here
 we invite scholars with genuine interdisciplinary perspectives as well as practitioners collaboration partners and actors with crosssector ambitions to take on challenges and opportunities to cocreate a more sustainable world. wil makes local regional and global issues working in a joint effort. we need to take a step further and reframe the roots of working and learning to make them simultaneously relevant in the context of the current global challenges with sustainability issues and technological advances.
 the general theme of the conference is wil in the service of society
 registration is now open  click here
 general program overview has been released check it out
 submission guidelines are now available here.
 download call for papers here
 5 september  8 september  deadline for submission of abstracts
 new date 12 october  notification of acceptance
 20 october  last day of early bird registration
 15 november  deadline final submission
 25 november  last day of registration
 conference format and content
 the event will be held on campus at university west in trollhättan sweden. we would be delighted to have you on campus to join us for a lively facetoface discussion and networking. it will be a hybrid event as well both speakers and delegates will be able to participate either online or at the campus venue. online and on campus participation is possible except for the poster sessions and the social program.
 four keynote sessions  webinars and on campus with support for questions and answers to speakers
 phd students poster session  mingle sessions in coffee areas on campus only posters can be displayed on the conference website
 three societal impact panels  webinars with support for questions and answers to panelists via online tools. a connected on campus lecture hall will house delegates and panelists on campus
 social program  on campus facilities for social and business networking will be provided. and we will allow for spacious areas with coffee breaks and mingling. an on campus and amazing social program will begild the physical presence.
 if you any questions about the conference please do not hesitate to contact us wil2022@hv.se
 professor of adult and vocational education in the school of education and professional studies at griffith university brisbane australia
 abstractconstituting integration in work integrated education and learningcommon to the effectiveness of what constitutes both work integrated learning wil or work integrated education wie is the degree by which two kinds of experiences are integrated. for wil it comprises how individuals come to reconcile and construct meaning capacities and dispositions from experiences in work and educational settings. that is how they engage deploy and change what they know can do and value through reconciling these two sets of experiences. for wie it comprises the organisation of experiences and educational interventions to assist students have and integrate the two sets of experiences intentionally as part of an intentional program of study. this presentation proposes that these two forms of integration are central to the quality of both wil and wie and are germane to educational considerations about the goals for processes of and outcomes of such provisions. it commences by delineating between wie and wil but emphasising the centrality of integrations to both conceptions and elaborates their particular qualities through distinctive ways that the conception of integration is constituted. following this considerations of the educational processes and learning practices that are necessary to realise effective outcomes for students are presented and discussed. in all the centrality of integration in what constitutes both work integrated education and learning is elaborated through this presentation.
 associate professor at the school of education university of the witwatersrand south africa
 abstract titlea knowledgebuilding approach for enhancing workbased learning lessons from teacher education
 given the challenges of our rapidly changing times it is not enough that students demonstrate observable measurable competences during workbased learning.  future practitioners need more than technical skills that work for now but leave them floundering when the demands of the context changes. if they are to be adaptable in the face of new challenges students also need to grasp the fundamental logics that give their practice purpose and coherence.
 what students focus on in their observations and reflections can either open up or shut down opportunities for their professional learning. knowledgebuilding approaches creates explicit opportunities for students to shift their focus between generalised principles and how these are enacted in contextually appropriate ways walton  rusznyak 2020.  students enrolled in teacher education programmes have already spent their school years in the classroom observing teachers at work. yet to develop professionally they need to notice aspects of teachers work that they had not noticed before rusznyak  bertram 2021. i show that merely being immersed in the workplace and working alongside established practitioners is not enough for students to make sense of how practices are enacted within particular contexts.
 i use shifts in contextdependence and complexity to show how despite their familiarity with classroom environments 29 of students participating in a study initially reported on teachers work as a disconnected series of actions. a mere 6 attributed the teachers actions to principled knowledge ethical orientations or contextual priorities.
 i introduce two interventions that create explicit opportunities for knowledgebuilding in ways that enhance the quality of workbased learning. to show the impact of these interventions on students learning in the workplace i use semantic waves an analytic tool offered by legitimation code theory lct maton 2013. defining four levels of contextdependence and complexity i can demonstrate how these interventions enhanced students capacity to notice the general in the particular and the particular in the general.
 the first intervention used a guided observation and analysis of the choices that all teachers regardless of their subject the grade levels or their contextual realities make in their daily work. an innovative course designed as a supplement to workintegrated learning when schools were closed during the covid19 pandemic enabled students to analyse the intentions and reasoning of teachers working in diverse contexts. by the end of the module more than 72 were noticing not only the teachers actions but also the reasons and intentions behind these actions and how they were directed towards organising learning pathways in the lessons.
 a second intervention used knowledgebuilding to empower students to make sense of their own experiences in the workplace through reflections. i demonstrate how traditional approaches to reflection use questions that direct students to report on their particular experiences without necessarily noticing how these inform and are informed by conceptual insights contextual priorities andor ethical orientations. by analysing shifts in the contextdependence and complexity of students observations and reflections i demonstrate how a different set of questions prompts students to look more intentionally for connections between principles of practice and the ways these are enacted in specific workplace interactions and activities rusznyak 2022.
 keywords workintegrated learning teacher education reflective practice semantic waves
 3.      referencesmaton k. 2013. making semantic waves a key to cumulative knowledgebuilding. linguistics and education 241 pp.822.rusznyak l. 2022. using semantic pathways to reveal the depth of preservice teachers reflections. education as change 261 124.rusznyak l. and bertram c. 2021. conceptualising workintegrated learning to support preservice teachers pedagogic reasoning. journal of education 83 3453.spaull n. 2013. poverty and privilege primary school inequality in south africa. international journal of educational development 335 436447.walton e. and rusznyak l. 2020. cumulative knowledgebuilding for inclusive education in initial teacher education. european journal of teacher education 431 1837.walton e. and rusznyak l. 2014. affordances and limitations of a special school practicum as a means to prepare preservice teachers for inclusive education. international journal of inclusive education 189 957974.
 associate professor reader of information systems and innovation department of management london school of economics and political science london united kingdom title what is work anyway? the promises and pittfals of digitising everything
 contemporary workplaces place great emphasis on employees ability to develop their skills and learn continuously while maintaining their health and wellbeing. to ensure a workintegrated learning wil where employees are provided the conditions to be able to develop and grow in their professional life and at the same time maintain health more evidencebased knowledge is needed.
 in this track we invite paper submissions that investigate health and social sustainability in relation to wil or similar processes of learning inthrough work to enables peoples skills abilities and resources to maintain and develop health and wellbeing. this could include studies focusing individual or group processes but also organizational or strategic initiatives aimed at supporting and developing health and sustainability.chairs professor sandra pennbrant professor anette ekströmbergström dr hildur gunnarsdottir associate professor maria skyvell nilsson.
 2. cocreating an inclusive society through workintegrated learning  contemporary societies face increasingly complex challenges of ecologic economic and not least social character. consequences of climate change to escalating nationalism and polarisation as well as growing socioeconomic disparities between people and societies are all multifaceted complex challenges facing our society. hence to continuously develop and strengthen an inclusive democratic society requires crosssectoral collaboration to cocreate and strengthen knowledge and learning between actors and institutions at all levels from local to international.
 3. forming professional knowledge by designing for workintegrated learning
 in an increasingly complex world our quality of life depends on the knowledge and competence of professionals. a key in todays working life is knowing how to continuously learn at work and redevelop work practices by integrating new concepts principles and approaches. workintegrated learning wil is a concept that refers both to the learning and knowledge production that takes place in and through work and to the specific process whereby students or professionals learn to integrate new concepts principles and approaches into work and educational practices. both students and professionals develop and improve their professional knowledge through experiencing wil.
 this track welcomes contributions that address innovative and critical perspectives on the possibilities and challenges of designing for students andor professionals wil in different settings. we invite theoretical as well as empirical contributions.chairs professor jan gustavsson nyckel dr sara willermark dr ville björk4. workintegrated learning in a digitalized society  digital transformation is changing our society and specifically impact working life conditions. digitalization disrupts existing and traditional work practices work structures management leadership and coworkership and therefore calls for new workplace designs organizational routines skills and learning. this is specifically interesting to study in professional organizations as manufacturing industry government and services organizations as a whole.
 1.knowledge and lifelong learning in higher education and the surrounding societyone of the greatest challenges in a knowledge based society is to recognize learning that occurs in different settings recognized prior learning  rpl. one way to keep the knowledge on a high level is to firstly validate skills and knowledges and thereafter to coproduce educational activities that matches the need from the individual and organizations doing this can open up a transfer between different educational systems to move to a more individual and organizational trajectory of learning.
 in the panel we will discuss among others  the role of higher education of today. the needs from the surrounding society for change in a lifelong learning lll perspective. how can we work with rpl and validation more systematically? how can we withhold the position of being a knowledgebased society with democratic values? and much more
 chair associate professor kristina johansson
 the panel will highlight questions such as what are the most important challenges associated with the contemporary industrial transformation towards a more sustainable society? is the sustainable transformation of the industry different in comparison to other structural shifts the swedish industrial sectors have dealt with historically? if yes how? how can we address and contribute to those challenges today and tomorrow?
 chair professor lars walter
 3. social sustainability through workintegrated learningescalating polarization segregation and violence between people and societies are multifaceted complex challenges facing our society. distrust of political democratic social systems affect possibilities of creating fair inclusive and sustainable societies.
 the panel will highlight questions such as how do we enhance sustainable social development processes that meets todays and tomorrows challenges? how can democratic governance ensure integration and rights of all resident groups? how can cocreative collaborative work between the public academic and private spheres be improved to enhance sustainable social development?
 chair professor per assmo
 contribution types are extended abstract developed paper and doctoral student poster. deadline for the final versions of extended abstracts and developed papers is 15 november 2022. doctoral student posters are brought physically by authors direct to the conference the content of the final version of your submission will be the basis for the paper or poster presentation at the international wil 22 conference.  the final version should be sent by email to wil2022@hv.sesubmit the file using the word 2013 version of microsoft or later version. we suggest naming your file correspondingauthorname_paper_id.docx to avoid confusion.  you find the paper_id in the notification letter. all accepted abstracts will be published in a wil conference abstract book with an isbn. developed papers and posters are accessible only to the conference delegates and will not be commonly published for public access.  contribution types extended abstracts the extended abstract should be minimum 600 words maximum 1000 words excluding references and follow the template instructions below. developed papers the developed paper should be maximum 8000 words excluding references and follow the template instructions below. doctoral student poster the doctoral student poster template file for a1format to be downloaded here.
 template instructions extended abstract and developed paper
 click here to download the complete call for papers here
 conference overall theme wil in the service of society
 1.       healthy and sustainable workintegrated learning
 in this track we invite paper submissions that investigate health and social sustainability in relation to wil or similar processes of learning inthrough work to enables peoples skills abilities and resources to maintain and develop health and wellbeing. this could include studies focusing individual or group processes but also organizational or strategic initiatives aimed at supporting and developing health and sustainability.
 2.       cocreating an inclusive society through workintegrated learning
 contemporary societies face increasingly complex challenges of ecologic economic and not least social character. consequences of climate change to escalating nationalism and polarisation as well as growing socioeconomic disparities between people and societies are all multifaceted complex challenges facing our society. hence to continuously develop and strengthen an inclusive democratic society requires crosssectoral collaboration to cocreate and strengthen knowledge and learning between actors and institutions at all levels from local to international.
 3.       forming professional knowledge by designing for workintegrated learning
 this track welcomes contributions that address innovative and critical perspectives on the possibilities and challenges of designing for students andor professionals wil in different settings. we invite theoretical as well as empirical contributions.
 4.       workintegrated learning in a digitalized society
 digital transformation is changing our society and specifically impact working life conditions. digitalization disrupts existing and traditional work practices work structures management leadership and coworkership and therefore calls for new workplace designs organizational routines skills and learning. this is specifically interesting to study in professional organizations as manufacturing industry government and services organizations as a whole.
 1. knowledge and lifelong learning in higher education and the surrounding society
 one of the greatest challenges in a knowledge based society is to recognize learning that occurs in different settings recognized prior learning  rpl. one way to keep the knowledge on a high level is to firstly validate skills and knowledges and thereafter to coproduce educational activities that matches the need from the individual and organizations doing this can open up a transfer between different educational systems to move to a more individual and organizational trajectory of learning.
 in the panel we will discuss among others  the role of higher education of today. the needs from the surrounding society for change in a lifeling learning lll perspective. how can we work with rpl and validation more systematically? how can we withhold the position of being a knowledgebased society with democratic values? and much more
 2. transformation and sustainable development for industrial workintegrated learning
 3.       social sustainability through workintegrated learning
 escalating polarization segregation and violence between people and societies are multifaceted complex challenges facing our society. distrust of political democratic social systems affect possibilities of creating fair inclusive and sustainable societies.
 submission types and guidelines
 the submission guidelines for the extended abstracts are similar across all tracks and the phd student track.
 deadline for the submissions of extended abstracts is 5 september 2022.
 email submission the extended abstract should be sent by email to wil2022@hv.se. submit the abstract using the word 2013 version of microsoft or later version. we suggest naming your file correspondingauthorname_wil2022.docx to avoid confusion between abstracts.
 results of the review process will be communicated to corresponding authors by 10 october 2022.
 corresponding authors of accepted abstracts will be further informed about the format guidelines applicable for the final presentation at the conference.
 there are two ways of presenting contributionsoral presentation and discussion of developed paper 10 min presentation and 20 min discussion led by an appointed scholar requires a final submission of a developed paperposter and phd student poster presentation to be presented and displayed in conference exhibition area does not require a final submission authors should provide a printed posterdeadline for the final submission of developed paper is 15 november 2022. further format guidelines will follow.
 developed papers and posters are accessible only to the conference delegates and will be published for public access.
 the conference will enable fruitful discussion of developed papers to improve their quality and to support networking and potential journal publication.
 conference chair professor ulrika lundh snis ulrika.snis@hv.se university west sweden. program chairs professor ulrika lundh snis ulrika.snis@hv.se professor lars svensson professor sandra pennbrandt professor jan gustavsson nyckel professor per assmo university west sweden.organizing chairs signe stahlénius signe.stahlenius@hv.se associate professor kristina johansson kristina.johansson @hv.se professor lars svensson lars.svensson@hv.se university west sweden professor ulrika lundh snis ulrika.snis@hv.se university west sweden
 here you find the general outline of the conference program. more detailed information will be shared with all registered delegates before the conference starts.
 wil conference 2022 also proudly present and welcome the following keynote speakers.
 wednesday december 7th
 10.0011.00   welcome to university west                                                                                                                                      keynote barbara czarniawska robots at work a threat or a promise?
 15.1515.45     coffee break
 15.4517.15       phd student poster presentations                               xmas mingel session with swedish glögg
 thursday december 8th
 09.0009.45    keynote stephen billett constituting integration in work integrated                                                           education and learning
 11.0011.15       coffee break
 15.0015.45    keynote lee rusznyak a knowledgebuilding approach for                                                                           enhancing workbased learning lessons from teacher education
 15.4516.30      coffee
 16.3017.30       societal impact panel 1  knowledge and lifelong learning lll in                                                         higher education and the surrounding society
 19.0023.00     conference gala dinner and entertainment
 friday december 9th
 09.0009.45      keynote carsten sorensen what is work anyway?                                the promises and pittfals of digitising everything
 10.0011.00         societal impact panel 2  transformation and sustainable                                                                           development in industrial workintegrated learning
 11.0011.30          coffee break
 11.3012.30         societal impact panel 3  social sustainability through work                                                                     integrated learning
 12.3013.00         summing up and conclusion
 3.      referencesmaton k. 2013. making semantic waves a key to cumulative knowledgebuilding. linguistics and education 241 pp.822.
 rusznyak l. 2022. using semantic pathways to reveal the depth of preservice teachers reflections. education as change 261 124.
 rusznyak l. and bertram c. 2021. conceptualising workintegrated learning to support preservice teachers pedagogic reasoning. journal of education 83 3453.
 spaull n. 2013. poverty and privilege primary school inequality in south africa. international journal of educational development 335 436447.
 walton e. and rusznyak l. 2020. cumulative knowledgebuilding for inclusive education in initial teacher education. european journal of teacher education 431 1837.
 walton e. and rusznyak l. 2014. affordances and limitations of a special school practicum as a means to prepare preservice teachers for inclusive education. international journal of inclusive education 189 957974.
 these pages will help you to find information concerning the practical matters when visiting our campus and trollhättan.
 questions regarding accomodation and trollhättan in general?
 click here
 click here to check out a map over campus
 welcome to the online registration for the first ever work integrated learning wil conference held in trollhättan sweden december 79 2022
 online registration is now open  click here
 deadline for early bird registration is october 20th 2022.
 deadline for registration is november 25th 2022.
 accompanying person
 1700 sek. excl 25 vat2125 sek. inc 25 vatplease note that a registration is needed from each person planning on attending the conference including accompanying persons.
 information regarding vataccording to swedish legislation vat will be added for all participants also international delegates. only exception is if you are employed by a swedish governmental organization and choose to pay via invoice.
 industrial engineering student william arkemar reflects on lyon exchange
 among the plethora of unforgettable memories william highlights a ski trip to the alps with friends from slovenia and mexico. a trips that brought together more than 30 exchange students. and recalling his daily life william cherishes the panoramic view of lyon from the university ecam lasalle and the tips to louis vuittons production facility where luxury leather bags were produced.being an exchange student in lyon posed unique challenges. initially grappling with language barriers in englishtaught courses but william swiftly adapted.in the beginning the language barriers of studying in english were a challenge but it was just a small challenge and it did not last that long.
 what william will miss the most from what he calls this peak of life period is the bonds forged with friends scattered globally. despite the physical distance monthly video meetings keep william and his new friend connected. lyon with its cultural richness vibrant social scene and proximity to various destinations leaves an lasting mark.
 i will also miss the superior opportunities for traveling apart from school and the activities in lyon we visited many other places in france and neighboring countries he adds.
 in offering advice to prospective exchange students william urges them to seize the opportunity. he emphasizes the experience is incredibly enriching interesting and fun. moreover chances like this are rare and may not come around again. encouraging a leap into the unknown he concludes being able to spend almost half a year abroad without having to work there is something you may not be able to do under normal circumstances. the next opportunity for such an experience might only arise when you are older and retired.
 a photo of one of the two rivers in lyon this is saône.
 the picture is taken from the rooftop bar at the opera building. me and two mexican friends.
 the state of open educational resources oer in swedish higher education  a case study
 the effects of using workintegrated learning in higher education on student and startup employability networking and entrepreneurship
 communication and collaboration gaps among phd students and ict as a way forward  results from a study in sweden
 doityourself learning in kenya  exploring mobile technologies for merging nonformal and informal learning
 a kenyan cloud school  massive open online amp ongoing courses for blended and lifelong learning
 frontrunners in ict  kenyan runners improvement in training informal learning and economic opportunities using smartphones
 perolof hansson william jobe
 the development of a personcentred communicative support tool for symptom relief in children with cancer
 a. wiljen j. chaplin william jobe e. johnson k. karlsson tomas lindroth a. schwarz m. stenmarker g. thunberg j. ohlen s. nilsson
 interaction gaps in phd education and ict as a way forward results from a study in sweden
 bridging the learning gap in kenya with mobile learning  challenges and future strategies
 no university credit no problem?  exploring recognition of nonformal learning
 putting a mooc for human rights in the hands of kenyans  the haki zangu case for nonformal learning
 william jobe perolof hansson
 native apps vs. mobile web apps
 moocs for professional teacher development
 i teach mainly on the international programme for politics and economics ippe in political science project management and workintegrated learning.
 educational background
 m.sc with a major in international administration and global governance 2018 university of gothenburg
 bachelor of arts with a specialization in political science and economics 2016 university west
 women with congenital heart defects  intervention for support increased knowledge and selfcare in connection with pregnancy
 how can the wood industry take its production to new levels with the help of smart technology solutions? can proven manufacturing methods and production systems from other industries be adapted for industrial wood construction? or do new innovations need to be developed?
 automated installation of windows
 ölandbased company clickin fixture systems has chosen to investigate how flexible automation solutions can be combined with the companys new window installation product.
 testing ar technology for roof truss production
 for derome träteknik participation in tillverka i trä has resulted in a pilot project where a doctoral student and a group of students have investigated whether ar technology can facilitate the companys production of roof trusses. derome manufactures roof trusses for a wide range of house models and each roof truss often has a unique design. this means that the roof truss operators are constantly adapting the installation to new dimensions.
 today we use laser light to mark where punched metal plates should be attached but the technology does not always provide precise instructions. thats why were testing how ar technology can make operators jobs easier. by using ar glasses the operator can receive precise installation instructions directly in their field of vision explains frank beno ceo of derome träteknik.
 tests show that this is an interesting technology that can improve the efficiency and quality of our roof truss production. the ar glasses can also facilitate the training of new operators. with new technology we also hope to attract more young people to the profession says frank beno.
 develops production logistics for new factories
 in what way do you believe the concept of wil can be misunderstood?
 we believe that there is a problem with how wil as a term is often used very narrowly where it only concerns describing wil as a phenomenon that students encounter during their education through various connections to the workforce says sara.
 the term wil is misunderstood in two ways related to how the term is usually used. the first misunderstanding is that wil is an educational approach that involves integrating work experiences into students education. here wil is confused with workintegrated education wie. wie is the educational approach while wil in this context is the learning that students are supposed to gain and experience through wie. the second misunderstanding is that wil is solely an educational phenomenon. wil is a form of learning that has multiple dimensions in terms of where and how wil occurs and is experienced. it is not only students who experience wil in various ways and contexts but professionals do so as well says ville.
 yes that was difficult i would say university and college employees whose work involves designing programs and courses for students to gain wil says ville.
 read the full article here
 enable students pathways to employment
 wace european iso at university west and university of porto are happy to invite you to a european wil seminar.
 invitation to a seminar arranged by the wace european international satellite office and university of porto
 this wace seminar focuses strictly on problematize different aspects on employmentunemployment and employability. attending this experience based seminar will provide you with tools to better analyse and understand the wil practices. the word seminar means plant a seed and the best way of doing this is to departure from the participants own experiences and try to understand them from a more theoretical approach. to make it a seminar you will be asked to write case descriptions from your own experiences that we will discuss together during the workshops with the aim to provide you with new perspectives. this of course means that there is some work that needs to be done before attending the seminar.
 pictures from the seminar
 paper theme 1
 paper theme 25
 paper theme 3
 paper theme 4
 wil_seminar.pptx porto wace iso
 pastedgraphic5 university of porto
 the student should fulfil the requirements for acceptance to thirdcycle studies.
 can a university help change the world? our answer is yes. university west is committed to making a difference and contributing to a positive societal development. through work integrated learning we work together with partners outside academia to create new knowledge for a sustainable future.
 wil is about learning through a lively exchange of ideas reflection and active participation. it is the basic principle that we apply to learning the exchange of ideas and educational development.
 we believe that advanced knowledge is created in many parts of society and not only within academia. we also believe that theoretical and practical knowledge are equally important. it is in the meeting between academia working life and the surrounding society that insights solutions and mutual development are best created that can meet the challenges society faces.
 government mandate
 in 2002 university west was commissioned by the swedish government to develop forms for workintegrated learning as part of the work with pedagogical renewal of higher education.
 work integrated learning meets political studies
 university west is the leading university for work integrated learning wil. the university was tasked with the development of wil by the swedish government 15 years ago and continues to lead the field today. wil is the practice of moving from academic and theoretical learning to realworld applications within the duration of your programme.
 no other international interdisciplinary programme offers a masters degree in wil with a specialisation in political studies. on graduation you are prepared for professional work across cultural and national borders to develop implement and lead projects handling politically and economically oriented issues for societal change.
 additionally university west offers an intimate campus environment without barriers between academic staff and students. here your professors are easily accessible to answer questions hold discussions and provide individual feedback. this together with our close connections to organisations institutions and companies in surrounding society puts a wealth of experts at your fingertips.
 your programme is divided into two progressively challenging phases
 elective courses focusing on applied political studies andor societal change
 courses focusing on work integrated learning in theory and practice
 the programme uses a wide range of pedagogical wil approaches to reach the overall goals of knowledge and skills. wips is a fulltime study programme that requires your active participation in all parts. the different educational methods in the programme are distributed as follows estimate
 practicalgroup work 10
 internshipthesis work 40
 upon completion of the programme you receive a master of arts ma 120 credits with a major in work integrated learning with a specialization in political studies.
 through their internship placements numerous alumni have built careers as planners project leaders administrators and analysts in municipalities regional authorities state organisations ngos international organisations as well as banks and private companies.
 you will be considered for admission to work integrated political studies if you fulfil the following entry requirements.
 bachelors degree of 180 credits within the field of social science or equivalent.
 students covered by bilateral student exchange agreements with university west can apply through a local system as exchange students. for more information contact us.
 students covered by bilateral student exchange agreements with university west are generally exempted from paying application fee.
 for the academic year 20252026 the tuition fee for this programme will be sek 120000 per year. you will pay the tuition fee per semester in four installments.
 students with citizenship in countries not within the eueea or switzerland are required to pay tuition fees for university studies in sweden. students covered by bilateral student exchange agreements with university west are generally exempted from paying application fee.
 for more information about tuition fees and exceptions you can check universityadmissions.se.
 master of arts ma with a major in work integrated learning with a specialization in political studies
 eueea citizens and students covered by bilateral student exchange agreements with university west are generally exempted from paying tuition fee.
 work integrated societal studies fulltime campus ais100
 the project has three overall phases
 1. development during this phase tasks will be translated into course objectives. companyspecific assignment packages will be created and linked to the respective course and learning objectives.
 2. implementation the model will be tested within at least two different courses and at two different universities and the students will carry out the workplacebased learning with at least two different employers.
 3. evaluation this phase continues throughout the project and is based on constantly evaluating efforts and processes in order to formalize a model that can be implemented in education.
 the students will actually produce solutions not only read about how to do it
 senior lecturer and programme director
 this programme has all the elements of what the automotive industry needs
 vp of automotive design and engineering at afry
 a lot of things are changing in society and production
 dean of the department of engineering
 we always try to keep the best students
 chapter leader of energy systems at nevs
 we are always open to and interested in working with students
 experts from volvo and nevs
 focus on  political studies including important questions
 professor at university west
 the industrial system in sweden is highly international
 an important aspect of the aerospace industrys efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from aviation is developing lighter more efficient jet engines.
 one way is to increase the combustion temperature in the engines combustion chamber explains nicolaie markocsan professor of thermal spraying at university west. another way is to reduce the weight of the engine. ceramic composites can withstand very high temperatures. they also have excellent properties and weigh a third of the superalloys used in todays aircraft engines.
 but one problem is that ceramic composites are adversely affected by the water vapour in the engines combustion gases. the solution is to coat the ceramic composite with a dense layer to avoid contact with these gases. thermal spraying can be an excellent coating technique for environmental barrier coatings.
 putting university west on the map
 the aerospace industry wants to investigate whether thermal spraying could be a suitable coating technology for the new generation of aircraft engines. we hope to contribute towards solving some of the problems involved in developing sufficiently dense layers with optimal microstructure.
 the project partners are gkn aerospace pratt  whitney safran saintgobain northwest mettech and ts engineering.
 writing rules for web editors
 writing for the web. for those who publish information on any of the universitys external or internal websites
 before you start writing
 when you type
 links documents and contact information
 postpublishing maintain your pages
 using the media bank
 le dinh hai yen came all the way from vietnam to study a master in finance at university west in trollhättan.
 yen studying at her apartment.
 from the tropical vietnam to the cold sweden
 yen first heard of sweden trough a friend of hers who had studied at another swedish university.
 my friend recommended me to come to sweden  to experience the nature the culture and the people yen explais.
 i didnt know much about sweden before i came here. but when i saw where university west is located near gothenburg the second largest city in sweden i thought that that would mean additional opportunities for work and living.
 traveling this far was a first for yen. who before this newer had left vietnam. from hot to cold from 100 million people to 10 million. its a big difference
 one of her fears leaving her home country was feeling homesick. in vietnam yen lives with her family so they are very close. being away from them and to live alone is a big adjustment.
 my friend who used to study here warned me that i might feel home sick. and i was very worried about this. but i went anyway  i took this once in a lifetime chance.
 although yen have felt quite homesick at times as her friend warned her of the good internet access in sweden have made it easy for her to have close contact with family back home.
 wifi and internet is available everywhere here. in the store at the university and the train station. so i call my family every day. i tell them of things that i do here  when im going places and such.
 so after all yen says that the homesickness isnt a problem.
 when leaving a tropical country and got to sweden everything was new and different for yen.
 one big difference is how you learn to appreciate the sun in another way here in sweden compared to vietnam. yen explains that in vietnam everyone always tries to avoid the sun but here in sweden everyone goes to lay under the sun in the middle of the day.
 at first i thought this was very strange. but now i try to do the same you enjoy the sun much more here. in the winter months you get very little sun so i always get out to enjoy the sun when i can.
 in my experience the best thing about sweden is the people the peaceful environment and the pure air says yen. everyone is friendly. pretty much everything is good here even the food
 life outside of the university
 yen walks us trough her daily routine.
 i go to the university in the morning come home in the afternoon and take a short nap and then i study from home. in the afternoon i go for a walk by the canal and enjoy the fresh air.
 sometimes she enjoys activities in the city such as tipspromenad christmas market and christmas tree lighting celebration or borrow a bicycle to visit the local shopping centre  överby. yen also enjoys going to the food store. she visits almost every day because the store have a special discount every day so you can buy really good food for a cheap price.
 she also continues to practice her faith while in sweden.
 since im a catholic i often visit the church here in trollhättan where i meet a lot of new people says yen. they teach me swedish and we have a fika.
 yen also really enjoys the fika organized at campus every tuesday. where many students from all over the world meet up and play games and fika together.
 vita villan where yen lives.
 studying at university west
 the facilities are very modern according to yen. for example she compares the library to a vietnamese coffee shop.
 there every one can come and sit in the beanbag chairs listen to music study and enjoy the sunlight. and everyone respects the silence so that you can study and read undisturbed.
 another thing she appreciates about university west is that every course ends with an evaluation where the students can say what they did and didnt like with the course. for yen this means that university west cares about quality.
 the contact with the teachers is another plus.
 when the students need support from the teaches they are really quick to answer our questions yen explains. i really like that there is an effective work and communication and that we as students get good support.
 before coming to sweden to study yen worked for over 20 years in vietnam. and now that she have studied she has a lot of newfound confidence and knowledge. she states that most organizations need accountants people who work with finance and even administration. and now after studying she can do pretty much everything.
 my goal is to work here in sweden. when i decided to go here i chose to invest my money here and planned for my future here. if i go back everything will be the same.
 yen celebrating the 1st day of lunar new year in trollhatan.
 read more about the master in finance here
 jag anlitas regelbundet som granskare för internationella vetenskapliga tidskrifter såsom journal of adolescence identity international journal of intercultural relations scandinavian journal of psychology emerging adulthood journal of ethnic and migration studies.
 yoga for children and adolescents with psychiatric conditions
 professor nóra kerekes at university west has led several studies where the effects of yoga on behavior mental health and on personality dimensions have been studied in different care contexts. her study on traumaadapted yoga in forensic psychiatry is ongoing at national level in sweden. now a new study is being launched  this time focusing on children and adolescents who suffer from trauma and mental health problems.
 nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry at university west.
 child and adolescent psychiatry staff members are given key roles
 as there are not yet studies with yoga in child and adolescent psychiatry the first step in the new study is to evaluate the feasibility of including traumaadapted yoga as a complement to the usual care in child and adolescent psychiatric clinics.
 staff in child and adolescents psychiatry care at upstate.
 yoga as a possible complementary treatment
 if feasibility of the method is proven nóra kerekes aims to evaluate whether traumaadapted yoga practice in combination with the standard treatment in child and adolescent psychiatric clinics will reduce trauma symptoms anxiety depression aggression selfinjurious behaviors and relationship difficulties as well as increase patients resilience and impulse control.
 it has previously been shown that yoga improves the physical and mental wellbeing of children as well as adults and helps young people to improve resilience mood and selfregulation of emotions and impulses.
 an important aspect of our ongoing and new projects is the aim to investigate whether inclusion the possibility for patients to practice yoga within their care could promote the wellbeing of the healthcare staff which is a rarely explored perspective of treatment studies.
 scientific evidence is a prerequisite of healthcare
 according to nóra kerekes the study is important in improving evidencebased and effective care for children and adolescents suffering from mental health problems as well as filling a scientific knowledge gap about the function of yoga as a care method.
 contact nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry university west nora.kerekes@hv.se 46 739 01 34 03
 here you can find information about our finished ongoing and planed studies and you can find contact with us who work in different countries and different project in different roles but each focusing on gathering new evidence about yogas effect in care settings.
 yoga within forensic psychiatric care swedish national study start 2021
 yoga within female prison settings her majesty of the queens prison and probation services uk national  study start 2022
 yoga within child and adolescents psychiatric care suny upstate medical university usa start 2022
 yoga within juvenile care  netherlands planerad start 2023
 carolien pentinga netherlands
 welding metallurgy and processes applied to additive manufacturing and friction stir welding as well as physical simulations using the gleeble and varestraint testers
 honorary professor budapest university of technology and economics hungary.
 consultant thermatool corporation east haven ct and timet corp toronto oh usa
 guest teacher in welding metallurgy and welding processes graduate level courses
 weldability testing physical simulations high strength steel s duplex stainless steels and aluminum alloys gasmetal reactions heat affected zone transformations
 young people cope better than expected with the longterm restrictions due to the pandemic
 more than 5000 high school students from five countries were included in a study on how they coped with the longterm restrictions due to the covid19 pandemic. the results are surprising
 the concerns and warnings about the serious negative consequences of the strict covid19 restrictions on mental health risk behaviors and victimization were not present in most young peoples lives says nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry at university west who is the project leader.
 the study is based on data collected in fall of 2020 measuring the impact of longterm covid19 restrictions on adolescents behavior mood psychological distress and psychosocial functioning. high school students 1519 years old from sweden usa vietnam serbia and morocco responded to the survey. the data is now being analyzed from different perspectives to answer several scientific questions. the first study on the multinational sample of students focusing on the impact of covid19 pandemic on adolescents life is now published with unexpected results.
 a significant proportion of adolescents reported that they spent less time outdoors devoted less time to meeting friends in real life and less time at school while they reported having more time to do things they did not have time to do before and that they spent more time to use social media to stay in touch.
 we investigated the socalled generation z. it seems that because they have grown up with social media in their everyday lives they were well equipped to adapt to physical isolation quickly and therefore may not felt as socially isolated as we predicted says nóra kerekes.
 nóra kerekes professor of medical science psychiatry at university west who is the project leader.
 an unexpected finding was that one third of the adolescents increased their physical activity and felt that they had more control over their lives during the restrictions. the majority of them did not engage more in risk behaviors and did not report worsened mental health or increased exposure to bullying. however there were gender differences.
 we found that female adolescents reported a stronger impact on their everyday life by the covid19 pandemic. this finding supports previous results showing that psychological distress level is higher among young women says nóra kerekes.
 while alcohol use showed a declining trend under restrictions the use of prescription drugs showed a slightly alarming trend. more than 60 of adolescents who reported a change in their prescription drug use reported increased use. this is something that nóra kerekes wants to draw attention to
 organizations in contact with adolescents such as schools healthcare and social services must be prepared for the fact that there are some young people who have been hit hard by this crisis and reported increased risk behaviors deteriorating mental health i.e. sleep problems increased stress anxiety and depression and increased exposure to bullying.
 comparison between countries is surprising
 if you compare the results between the participating countries you see that swedish adolescents reported the lowest impact of covid19 on their lives. as expected a stronger impact on young peoples lives was reported from vietnam serbia and morocco while unexpectedly young people in the usa ny state reported the strongest negative impact says nóra kerekes.
 we must be extremely careful about generalizing this result due to the low response rate from the usa. the very fact that it was the most difficult to recruit high school students to respond to our survey in the usa showed that young people there were strongly affected by the restrictions and the events of the pandemic.
 lastly nóra kerekes would like to highlight some positive perspectives of the findings.
 high school counselors teachers and the young peoples parents deserve recognition for creating ideal conditions for high school students to positively cope with this crisis.
 scientific publication changes in adolescents psychosocial functioning and wellbeing as a consequence of longterm covid19 restrictions
 to the international project mental and somatic health without borders
 contact nóra kerekes professor of medical science university west nora.kerekes@hv.se  46 739 01 34 03
 young people with risky use of alcohol and drugs
 the bidirectional agency in therapeutic alliance  an investigation of the relational resources between a social worker and a client in social work with young people that use drugs.
 although the therapeutic effect of the alliance between the social worker and the client is widely recognized the knowledge on what actually constitutes a successful alliance is limited. the factors at stake are mostly referred to as common factors and include the ability of the social worker to be warm personal caring and devoted towards the client.
 the aim of this study is to increase the understanding of what resources a successful relationship between a social worker and a young client carries in the respect of enabling agentic behavior in the young client. with a bidirectional perspective on the construct of agency the relationship between the social worker and the young client is investigated through a collaboration with a drug prevention program in the municipality of ale in the southwestern part of sweden where young clients in the age between 14 and 18 together with their social worker are interviewed regarding their mutual relationship. the study is expected to expand the knowledge on how social workers establish functional relationship with young clients relationships that in turn represents an important resource for the voice of the young client in his or her own process of change.
 young peoples decisionmaking in their everyday life
 data will be collected from approximately 280 persons in the agegroup of 1030 years within each country. the participants answer interview questions and play computer games where they face different types of decisions.
 the results will provide information about how decisionmaking evolves within young people over time and how it differs amongst different cultures.
 here you will find themes regarding pedagogical situations.
 learn more about abc workshop
 you can record your lectures using several different tools and methods.
 learn more about how to do record.
 to the teachers guide
 youths sexual development in traditional and recent everydaylife environments
 sexuality undergoes huge transformations in the period of a teenager. puberty is often understood as a starting point for youths sexual interests and fantasies. traditionally youths sexual activities were more perceived as romantic relations. however todays teenagers grow up with internet. sexual material is a big part of internet and parts of it is directly addressing youths. parents professionals and others express a deep worry of the kind of significance that these internet activities have with regards to teenagers transformation. however in the present situation we do not have any further information whether this worry has a fundamental reason or not. the aim of this study is finding the answers for yet unanswered but greatly relevant questions for the present time what kind of significance do sexual internet activities have for youths that are in the middle of their sexual development? to what consequences does it lead to when youths participate and are a part of such activities? which youths are sexually active on the internet and on other information technologically platforms? how do connections look like between the sexual activities within the more recent and the traditional everyday life environments?
 therése skoog university of örebro
 zoom is our tool for digital meetings. you can connect with computer tablet and mobile phone.
 if you have questions or want to learn more about zoom contact the ict support at akademus.
 how do i prepare for participating in a zoom meeting?
 how do i handle the microphone and the webcam?
 how do i see the participant list and use the chat?
 how do i show documents and presentations?
 how do i add a profile picture?
 how do i change background?
 what to keep in mind when hosting an emeeting?
 how do i invite to an emeeting?
 how do i make a personal emeeting link for recurring emeeting?
 how do i increase the security?
 how do i make a recording?
 how can i use the host key to host a colleagues meeting?
 how do i log in to zoom i have no zoom account?
 use zoom in education
 what should i keep in mind when i use zoom in education?
 how do i join zoom in a canvas course as a teacher?
 how do i share a portion of my screen?
 when you are invited to a meeting you will usually have link sent to you. click on the link and you will automatically enter the meeting. if zoom is not installed on your computer it will be downloaded. that is how easy it is to get into zoom but if you want to prepare and get more out of your meeting there are some things you can do
 in addition to an internet connection and a computer or tabletmobile it is good to have a webcam and a headset. it is also possible to use mobile headphones.
 zoom is installed on your pc. start the program and log in with your hv login. if for some reason the program isnt installed or if you want to install it on another computer you can download it here select zoom client for meetings.
 you can get acquainted with the features in this test meeting which is available at zoom. below are four sections where the basics of zoom are reviewed. if you want extra information about what zoom provides for opportunities you can take part in zooms own support pages.
 always use headset or mobile headphones when attending an emeeting. the risk of echo and noise is minimized and it becomes a better sound experience for all participants. to avoid extraneous noise mute the microphone when you are not talking. there will also be a more pleasant sound in the meeting if only those who speak are unmuted.
 remember to have a calm background and no backlight so you are well visible in the meeting. keep in mind that when you have the camera on you are visible in the meeting even if you do not see yourself.
 unmute and start the webcam in the bottom left corner. if you do not see the toolbar move the cursor and it will appear. a small arrow next to the camera and microphone opens a menu where you can choose which equipment to use. make it a habit to always check this. do an audio test with test speaker  microphone which you will find in the microphone menu.
 the film shows how to handle audio and video in the meeting.
 in the participant list you can see who is participating in the meeting and who is the host. next to your name you can unmute and change your name. you can invite others to an ongoing meeting with invite. through various symbols you can make yourself heard in the meeting without talking for example raising your hand or answering yes or no. these symbols have now moved to reactions in the menu bar.
 to write in the meeting use the chat. you can write to everyone or a specific participant. the chat is always empty when you enter the meeting. if it was used before you entered the meeting you cannot see those messages.
 the film shows how to use the participant list and the chat during a meeting.
 it is as common to view documents or presentations during a zoom meeting as during a physical meeting. you can choose to share your entire screen or only a specific document. always prepare before the meeting by opening the documents to be displayed and shutting down everything else. when you share something in the meeting it is marked with a frame.
 the film shows how to share documents and presentations in zoom.
 to get the most out of the meeting you can change the layout.
 in speaker view the speaker is seen in a larger picture and the other participants are small pictures at the top. speaker view is voice controlled so if many participants are talking the pictures change all the time. then gallery view can be useful instead. in that mode all participants are shown with equal picture the more participants there are in the meeting the smaller each participant picture becomes. if you want to decide for yourself who should be seen in a large picture you can use pin video. when watching a presentation side by side mode is a good choice. then you can decide for yourself who and what should be most visible.
 the video below shows examples of what the different functions look like in practice and where to find them in the menus.
 when your webcam is turned off only a black box is displayed. if you upload a profile picture the picture will be displayed instead.
 do as follows click on the small gear at the top right settings and then select profile. click on the pen in the box above your name and upload your profile picture here.
 how do i change the background?
 when you have your camera turned on you can choose to blur your background or use an image as a background. to use university wests backgrounds you need to be logged in to zoom.
 do as follows click the arrow next to your camera and select choose virtual background ... now you can choose to blur your background or select an image as background.
 when you create a meeting yourself you become the host in that meeting. you automatically get access to more functions such as managing the participants and the opportunity to record the meeting. there are some things to highlight that are good to know as a host.
 the chat
 the chat is an instant chat which means that only those present in the emeeting can take part in the chat. the chat is always blank when you enter the meeting regardless of what has been written before. therefore important information added to the chat should be repeated if participants have arrived late.
 do not create emeetings for others
 it is not possible to host several meetings at the same time. if you have created emeetings that are to be active at the same time no one can join the other emeetings when you are already in an emeeting. therefore follow the motto the person holding the meeting invites to the meeting. during an ongoing meeting however you can transfer the hosting to another participant.
 zoom updates frequently and comes with new features and changed layout. make sure you have the latest version. in the zoom desktop app you can click on your profile picture or initials and click on check for updates to see if you have the latest version.
 you can view movies during a zoom meeting but be aware that there may be sync issues between audio and video. also remember to click in the share sound box at the bottom of the share window so that the sound of the movie can be heard for the participants. a tip is to instead post a link to the movie in the chat so the participants can see it one by one and after a while you will gather in the meeting.
 in the zoom application you can invite to an emeeting. there are a number of settings you can make e.g. if a code is needed to enter the meeting. when the meeting is saved a meeting invitation is created in outlook at the same time. there you add the meeting participants and send the invitation as an email.
 the film shows how to invite to a meeting. the film shows an older version of zoom the buttons look a little different but the functions are the same.
 in zoom you can create recurring emeetings to avoid handing out new links every time you meet. furthermore you can create a personal meeting room with your own name that you can share with your colleagues so that they can more easily contact you for quick emeetings. below you will find a video that explains in more detail how to handle these features.
 being able to conduct a meeting in zoom with only intended participants is an important detail in zoom. there are settings to make during the ongoing meeting e.g. that no one else can enter the meeting. you can use the waiting room to be able to decide for yourself when a person is allowed to enter the meeting. you can make settings when you create the meeting invitation e.g. if participants are allowed to enter the meeting before the host. the film tells you how it works and in what ways you can increase security.
 when you host you can record the meeting. the movie file is saved on your computer and for others to see you can upload it to hv play. more information on how to use hv play can be found here. the film shows how the recording function works.
 zoom can also be used to record a powerpoint presentation with sound. this movie shows you the easiest way to choose the right window to record.
 if there are several of you who lead for example an emeeting conference you may need to move the hosting of the meeting between you. to be able to do this there is the host key function. the film explains how it works.
 this is a film you can include in an invitation to an econference or other digital meeting where there are external participants who are not users of zoom. the link to the film can be found here.
 a presenter can allow another meeting participant to control the presentation. this is especially useful when two or more participants are responsible for different parts of the same presentation. the feature is called slide control.
 start the presentation in the meeting.
 in the toolbar you will now find slide control.
 select the person who should control the presentation.
 control of the presentation will be retained until you stop sharing.
 tip as a presenter you may sometimes want to use sidebyside mode to be able to see other meeting participants while presenting. in that case slide control is a solution. email the presentation to one of the meeting participants who shares it in the meeting but gives you control.
 note slide control must be enabled in your settings before you can use it. you can find it under settings  in meeting basic.
 when you use zoom in education it is good to have an external webcam and an usb headset for better audio and picture in the meeting. contact your manager if you need to purchase this. when using an emeeting you encounter new challenges here are some concrete tips to use in teaching.
 the expectations of the meeting
 have clear expectations for each meeting and tell what applies to for example the use of a webcam and microphone. make sure that the demands placed on the participants also have a clear impact on the implementation of the meeting. give each other time to respond there may be some delay so be patient.
 distribute the word
 follow the list of participants and not the camera images when its time to speak or present. the order of the camera images is individual and your layout is not the same as the other participants.
 if there are many students online encourage them to use the chat to ask questions. remember to repeat the questions orally before answering them. you as a teacher can also answer questions directly in the chat. ask students to use the reaction symbols. if there are many who are unmuted you as the host can temporarily turn off the participants microphones.
 there are videos and instructions that you can add to your course on how your students can use zoom. go directly to canvas commons and filter out the learning objects that are shared within university west. you can read more about how to use commons in canvas at university west. the films and instructions are also available on the students zoom page.
 all automatically created canvas courses have their own emeeting link to zoom. you click into the meeting in the usual way and then become a participant in the meeting. to take over the hosting of the emeeting you use a host key that is specified in the course. the film shows how this works.
 as a host you can make digital group rooms called breakout rooms which can be very useful for group discussions. you can make the group division randomly manually or the students themselves choose which group they want to belong to. you as the host can go in and out of these rooms to take part in the discussion or answer questions. below you will find a video on how to manage these rooms.
 in powerpoint it is possible to add notes to each slide as a support during the presentation. these can be seen in presenter view. when you cannot use presenter view in zoom you can instead share a portion of your screen. the film shows how you can easily hold a presentation without displaying the notes with the share  portion of screen function.